---
chapter: 1
chapter_title: Introduction to Science
section: 4
section_title: Properties of Matter
---

# **Properties of Matter**

### Key Ideas

- Why are color, volume, and density classified as physical properties?
- **>** Why are flammability and reactivity classified as chemical properties?

### **Key Terms**

melting point boiling point density reactivity

### Why It Matters

Properties determine uses. For instance, the properties of a substance called *aerogel* enable it to trap fastmoving comet particles.

When playing sports, you choose a ball that has the shape and mass suitable for your game. It would be hard to play soccer with a football or to play softball with a bowling ball. The properties of the balls make the balls useful for different activities.

### **Physical Properties**

Shape and mass are examples of *physical properties*. Some other physical properties are color, volume, and texture. The balls in **Figure 1** have different physical properties. **> Physical properties are characteristics that can be observed without changing the identity of the substance.** For example, you can determine the color, mass, and shape of a ball without changing the substance that makes up the ball.

Physical properties are often very easy to observe. For instance, you can easily observe that a tennis ball is yellow, round, and fuzzy. Matter can also be described in terms of physical properties that are not as obvious. For example, a physical property of air is that it is colorless.

### Physical properties can help identify substances.

Because many physical properties remain constant, you can use your observations or measurements of these properties to identify substances. For example, you recognize your friends by their physical properties, such as height and hair color. At room temperature and under atmospheric pressure, all samples of pure water are colorless and liquid. Pure water is never a powdery green solid. The physical properties of water help you identify water.

Figure 1 The physical properties of these balls make the balls useful in different sports. How many physical properties can you observe?

# Physical properties can be observed or measured.

You can use your senses to observe some of the basic physical properties of a substance: shape, color, odor, and texture. Another physical property that you can observe is *state*—the physical form of a substance. Solid, liquid, and gas are three common states of matter. For example, water can be

Regardless of the mass or volume of water, the physical prop-

in the form of solid ice, liquid water, or gaseous steam.

Other physical properties, such as melting point and boiling point, can be measured. The temperature at which a

substance changes from a solid to a liquid is the melting point. The temperature at which a liquid changes to a gas is the boiling point. A characteristic of any pure substance is

READING

**Finding Examples** 

As you read this section, find

discussed. Don't forget to use signal words as clues. Make a

melting point (MELT ing POYNT) the

temperature and pressure at which a solid

boiling point (BOYL ing POYNT) the

temperature and pressure at which a liquid

becomes a liquid

becomes a gas

Academic Vocabulary

bending easily without breaking

wear or damage

durable (DUR uh buhl) able to withstand

Figure 2 Aluminum is light, strong, and durable, which makes

Matter

it ideal for use in foil.

Chapter 2

**52** 

flexible (FLEK suh buhl) capable of

examples for each property that is

table of properties and examples.

that its boiling point and its melting point are constant if the pressure remains the same. At sea level, water boils at 100 °C and freezes at 0 °C. At constant pressure, pure water always has the same boiling point and the same melting point.

erties of the water are the same. This principle is true for all pure substances.

Other physical properties that can be measured are

strength, hardness, and magnetism. The ability to conduct electricity or heat is also a physical property. For instance, copper conducts electricity well, while plastic does not.

Physical properties help determine uses.

Every day, you use physical properties to recognize sub-

into a metal cup?

stances. Physical properties help you decide whether your socks are clean (odor), whether your books will fit in your backpack (volume), or whether your clothes match (color).

Physical properties are often used to select substances that may be useful. Copper is used in power lines, telephone lines, and electric motors because it conducts electricity well. As **Figure 2** shows, aluminum is used in foil because it is light-

weight yet <u>durable</u> and <u>flexible</u>. Car frames are made of steel, which is a strong solid that provides structure. Tires are made of a flexible solid that cushions your ride. Antifreeze is used in car radiators because it remains a liquid at temperatures that

would freeze or boil water.

Can you think of other physical properties that help us determine how we can use a substance? Some substances have the ability to conduct heat, while others do not. Plasticfoam cups do not conduct heat well, so they are often used for

1

holding hot drinks. What would happen if you poured hot tea

Quick Lab

Density is different from weight.

**Density of Water** 

graduated cylinder.

volumes of water.

**Procedure** 

I Find the mass of an empty 100 mL

4 Use graph paper or a graphing

calculator to plot volume (on the

x-axis) versus mass (on the y-axis).

**Analysis** 1. Estimate the mass of 55 mL of

2 Pour 10 mL of water from a 250 mL beaker into the graduated

cylinder. Use a balance to find the

mass of the graduated cylinder that contains the water.

water and 85 mL of water.

2. Predict the volume of 25 g of water and 75 g of water.

3. Use your graph to determine the

density of water.

Figure 3 Helium-filled balloons

brick has more matter in a

which has less volume?

float because helium is less dense than air. Hot-air balloons rise for a similar reason. Which is less

dense: hot air or cool air?

Figure 4 This brick is denser than this sponge because the

similar volume. If a brick and

a sponge have equal masses,

Properties of Matter 55

Denser

More mass

with something else of the same volume. The balloons in Figure 3 float because the denser air sinks around them. A

3 Repeat Step 2 for several different

substance that has a high density is "heavy" in comparison with another object of the same volume. A stone sinks to the

bottom of a pond because the stone is denser than the water. The brick and sponge shown in Figure 4 have similar

volumes, but the brick is more massive than the sponge. Because the brick has more mass per unit of volume than the

A substance that has a low density is "light" in comparison

sponge does, the brick is denser. If you held the brick in one hand and the sponge in the other hand, you would know instantly that the brick is denser than the sponge.

Although the denser brick feels heavier than the sponge, weight and density are different. In the example of a brick and sponge, both objects have about the same volume. But com-

pare two objects that have different volumes. Two pounds of feathers are heavier than one pound of steel. But the feathers are less dense than the steel, so two pounds of feathers have a

greater volume than one pound of steel does.

Section 2

Less mass Less dense

### QuickLab @10 min

### Reactivity

- Measure 4 g each of compounds A and B. Place them in separate clear plastic cups.
- Observe the color and texture of each compound. Record your observations.
- 3 Add 5 mL of vinegar to each cup. Record your observations.
- Baking soda reacts with vinegar, but powdered sugar does not. Which of these two substances is compound A, and which is compound B?

### Physical and chemical properties are different.

It is important to remember the differences between physical and chemical properties. You can observe physical properties without changing the identity of the substance. But you can observe chemical properties only in situations in which the identity of the substance changes.

Figure 6 summarizes the physical and chemical properties of a few common substances. Some substances have similar physical properties but different chemical properties. Other substances have similar chemical properties but different physical properties. For example, wood and rubbing alcohol both have the chemical property of flammability, but they have different physical properties.

Figure 6 Comparison of Physical and Chemical Properties

| Substance         | Wood                 | Iron                               | Red dye                            |
|-------------------|----------------------|------------------------------------|------------------------------------|
|                   |                      |                                    |                                    |
| Physical property | has a grainy texture | bends without<br>breaking          | has red color                      |
| Chemical property | is flammable         | reacts with oxygen<br>to form rust | reacts with bleach;<br>loses color |

### Section 2 Review

### **KEY IDEAS**

- 1. List two physical properties and two chemical properties.
- 2. Identify the following as physical properties or chemical properties.
  - a. reacts with water
- e. boils at 100 °C
- **b.** is red
- **f.** is nonflammable
- c. is shiny and silvery
- g. has a low density
- d. melts easily
- h. tarnishes in moist air

### CRITICAL THINKING

3. Applying Concepts Describe several uses for plastic, and explain why plastic is a good choice for these purposes.

4. Making Inferences Suppose that you need to build a raft. Write a paragraph describing the physical and chemical properties of the raft that would be important to ensure your safety.

### Math Skills

- 5. Calculate the density of a rock that has a mass of 454 g and a volume of 100.0 cm<sup>3</sup>.
- 6. Calculate the density of a substance in a sealed 2,500 cm3 flask that is full to capacity with 0.36 g of
- 7. A sample of copper has a volume of 23.4 cm<sup>3</sup>. If the density of copper is 8.9 g/cm<sup>3</sup>, what is the copper's mass?

# **Changes of Matter**

### Key **Ideas**

- Why is a getting a haircut an example of a physical change?
- Why is baking bread an example of a chemical change?
- ▶ How can mixtures and compounds be broken down?

### **Key Terms**

physical change chemical change

### Why It **Matters**

The process of making glass—for practical applications or as art—involves both physical and chemical changes.

Leaves change color in the fall, an ice cube melts in your glass, and bread dough turns into bread when it bakes in the oven. Such changes occur in matter as a result of physical or chemical changes.

### **Physical Changes**

If you break a piece of chalk, you change its physical properties of size and shape. But no matter how many times you break the chalk, its chemical properties remain unchanged. The chalk is still chalk, and each piece of chalk would produce bubbles if you placed it in vinegar. Breaking chalk is an example of a physical change. A physical change affects one or more physical properties of a substance without changing the identity of the substance.

**Figure 1** shows several examples of physical changes. Some other examples of physical changes are dissolving sugar in water, sanding a piece of wood, and mixing oil and vinegar.

**physical change** (FIZ i kuhl CHAYNJ) a change of matter from one form to another without a change in chemical properties

**Figure 3** When sugar dissolves in water, the water molecules attract the sugar molecules and pull them apart. As a result, the sugar molecules spread out in the water.

### Physical changes do not change a substance's identity.

Melting a gold nugget to form a gold ring involves several physical changes, as **Figure 2** shows. The gold changes from solid to liquid and then back to solid. The shape of the gold also changes. The gold nugget becomes a ring of gold. But these physical changes do not change all of the properties of the gold. For example, the gold's color, melting point, and density do not change.

During a physical change, energy is absorbed or released. After a physical change, a substance may look different, but the arrangement of atoms that make up the substance is not changed. A gold nugget, molten gold, and gold rings are all made of gold atoms.

### Dissolving is a physical change.

When you stir sugar into water, the sugar dissolves and seems to disappear. But the sugar is still there. You can taste the sweetness when you drink the water. What happened to the sugar?

**Figure 3** shows sugar molecules dissolving in water. (The sugar and water molecules are represented as spheres to simplify the diagram.) When sugar dissolves, the sugar molecules become spread out between the water molecules. The molecules of the sugar do not change. So, dissolving is an example of a physical change.

### **Chemical Changes**

Some materials are useful because of their ability to change and combine to form new substances. For example, the compounds in gasoline burn in the presence of oxygen to form carbon dioxide and water. The burning of the compounds is a chemical change. A chemical change happens when one or more substances are changed into entirely new substances that have different properties. The chemical properties of a substance describe which chemical changes can happen. You can learn about chemical properties by observing chemical changes.

Reading Check What is the difference between a physical change and a chemical change?

### Chemical changes happen everywhere.

You see chemical changes happening more often than you may think. When a battery dies, the chemicals inside the battery have changed, so the battery can no longer supply energy. The oxygen that you inhale when you breathe is used in a series of chemical reactions in your body. After the oxygen reacts with molecules containing carbon, the oxygen is then exhaled as part of the compound carbon dioxide. Chemical changes occur when fruits and vegetables ripen and when the food you eat is digested. **Figure 4** shows some other examples of chemical changes.

chemical change (KEM i kuhl CHAYNJ) a change that occurs when one or more substances change into entirely new substances with different properties

Figure 4 Examples of Chemical Changes

Chemical reactions produce pigments that give leaves their colors. In the fall, green leaves change colors as different reactions take place.

When effervescent tablets are added to water, the citric acid and baking soda in them react to produce carbon dioxide, which forms bubbles.

The shiny, orange-brown copper of the Statue of Liberty has reacted with carbon dioxide and water to form green copper compounds.

Why It **Matters** 

# **How Is Glass Made?**

People have been making glass for thousands of years. The raw

batch. When the batch is heated to

materials of sand, limestone, and soda ash are heated and turned

A glass blower dips a hol-

1. After the molten glass has been shaped, it cools and solidifies. Is this a physical change or a chemical change?

Topic: Glass

Code: HK80678

65

low iron blowpipe into the hot mixture and picks up a gob of molten glass. The blower occasionally reheats the glass to keep it soft.

into glass through chemical changes. Several physical changes, including changes in state, shape, and size, also occur. There are different ways to shape the glass once it has been made. One method, called glass blowing, is illustrated below.

Glassmakers often

purchase the raw ingredients-sand, limestone, and soda ash-mixed together in a form called

about 1,500 °C, the mixture becomes transparent and flows like honey.

YOUR UNDERSTANDING CONCEPTS

bulb that can be pulled,

WRITING IN SCIENCE 2. Research another method of shaping glass, such as pressing, drawing, or casting.

Write a paragraph describing By turning the sticky glob and blowing into this method. the tube, the glass blower creates a hollow

twisted, and blown into different shapes. When the finished shape is broken from the tube, a work of art has been

# **Converting Units**

conversion value must also be cubed.

**b.** grams per cubic meter  $(g/m^3)$ 

**3.** Find the density of helium in grams per cubic

4. Will the density of gasoline in grams per cubic

5. What is the density of iron in grams per cubic

Matter

meter be greater than or less than the value given

in the table? To see if you are correct, convert the

value given in the table to grams per cubic meter.

Solve

and solve.

Practice

millimeter?

meter?

Chapter 2

Science Skills

**Problem Technology** Math Density can be expressed in grams per cubic centimeter (g/cm<sup>3</sup>). The density of lead is 11.3 g/cm<sup>3</sup>. What is the **Scientific Methods** density of lead in grams per cubic millimeter (g/mm<sup>3</sup>)? Graphing Solution Identify Given: density,  $d = 11.3 \text{ g/cm}^3$ List the given and unknown values. Unknown: density,  $d = ? g/mm^3$ Plan Determine the relationship between **a.** 1 cm = 10 mmunits. Because cm is cubed, the

> **b.** density in  $g/mm^3 = density in \frac{g}{cm^3} \times \frac{1 cm^3}{1,000 mm^3}$ **b.** Write the equation for the conversion. Use the units as a guide. If the units don't cancel properly, you may have the conversion equation backwards. density in g/mm<sup>3</sup> =  $\frac{11.3 \text{ g}}{\text{em}^3} \times \frac{1 \text{ em}^3}{1,000 \text{ mm}^3}$ Insert the known values into the equation,

Use the table to answer the following questions. **Substance** 

1. Find the density of dry air in the following units: Air (dry) a. grams per cubic millimeter (g/mm<sup>3</sup>) Brick (common) 2. What is the density of water in grams per cubic

 $d = 0.0113 \,\mathrm{g/mm^3}$ 

Gasoline Helium Ice Iron

> Lead Nitrogen Steel Water

 $1 \text{ cm}^3 = (10 \text{ mm})^3 = 1,000 \text{ mm}^3$ 

Density (g/cm<sup>3</sup>)

0.00129

0.00018

0.00125

1.9

0.7

0.92 7.86

11.3

7.8

1.00

**Chapter Outline** 

Kinetic Theory States of Matter Energy's Role

**1** Matter and Energy

Ochanges of State

Behavior of Gases
Properties of Gases

Gas Laws

74

Energy

Fluids
Pressure
Buoyant Force
Pascal's Principle
Fluids in Motion

Energy and Changes of State Conservation of Mass and

# States of Matter

Why It **Matters** 

This temporary art exhibit, called "100,000 Pounds of Ice and Neon," was on display for a weekend at an ice rink in Tacoma, Washington. Colorful gases inside solid blocks of ice illustrate two states of matter.


