---
chapter: 1
chapter_title: Introduction to Science
section: 5
section_title: Matter and Energy
---

# **Matter and Energy**

### Key Ideas

- > What makes up matter?
- What is the difference between a solid, a liquid, and a gas?
- > What kind of energy do all particles of matter have?

### **Key Terms**

fluid plasma energy temperature thermal energy

### Why It **Matters**

When you can see your breath on a cold day, you are watching gaseous water turn into liquid water.

When food is cooking, energy is transferred from the stove to the food. As the temperature increases, some particles in the food move very fast and spread through the air in the kitchen. The *state*, or physical form, of a substance is determined partly by how the substance's particles move.

### **Kinetic Theory**

If you visit a restaurant kitchen, such as the one in **Figure 1**, you can smell the food cooking even if you are a long way from the stove. One way to explain this phenomenon is to make some assumptions. First, assume that the atoms and molecules within the food substances are always in motion and are colliding with each other. Second, assume that the atoms and molecules move faster as the temperature increases.

A theory based on these assumptions is called the *kinetic* theory of matter. According to the kinetic theory of matter, matter is made of atoms and molecules. These atoms and molecules act like tiny particles that are always in motion. The following are observations of particles in motion.

- The higher the temperature of the substance is, the faster the particles move.
- At the same temperature, more massive particles move slower than less massive ones.

For example, consider a cup of hot tea. At first, the particles move very quickly. As the tea cools, its particles begin to slow down. As you will see, the kinetic theory can help you understand the differences between the three common states of matter: solid, liquid, and gas.

**Figure 1** The ingredients in foods are chemicals. A skilled chef understands how the chemicals in foods interact and how changes of state affect cooking.

Particles of a gas, such as carbon dioxide, move fast enough to overcome nearly all of the attraction between them. The particles move independently of one another.

Particles of a liquid move fast enough to overcome some of the attraction between them. The particles are able to slide past one another.

Figure 2 Three Familiar States of Matter

### **States of Matter**

Three familiar states of matter are solid, liquid, and gas, as Figure 2 shows. Notice the differences in the atomic models for each state. Particles in a solid vibrate in place. In a liquid, the particles are closely packed, but they can slide past each other. Gas particles are in constant motion and do not usually stick together. > You can classify matter as a solid, a liquid, or a gas by determining whether the shape and volume are definite or variable. Most matter found naturally on Earth is either a solid, a liquid, or a gas, although matter can also be in other states.

### Solids have a definite shape and volume.

An ice cube removed from an ice tray has the same volume and shape that it had in the ice tray. The structure of a solid is rigid, and the particles cannot easily change position. The particles are held closely together by strong attractions, and they vibrate in place. Because of the strong attractions between the particles, solids have a definite shape and volume.

### Liquids change shape, not volume.

The particles in a liquid move more rapidly than the particles in a solid do. The particles move fast enough to overcome some of the forces of attraction between them. Thus, liquids flow freely. And liquids are able to take the shape of their containers. Although liquids change shape, they do not easily change volume. The particles of a liquid are close together and are in contact most of the time. Thus, the volume of a liquid remains constant.

### READING TOOLBOX

### **Comparison Table**

Complete a comparison table for the three common states of matter as you read these pages. See the Reading Toolbox on p. 76 if you need help getting started.

### Gases change both shape and volume.

Like liquids, gases do not have fixed shapes. Liquids and gases both can flow. Because the particles in liquids and gases can move past each other, liquids and gases are **fluids**.

But gases change more than shape—they change volume, too. If you leave a bottle of perfume open, particles of the liquid perfume will escape as gas, and you will smell it around the room. The particles of a gas move fast enough to break away from each other. So, the amount of empty space between the particles changes, and the gas expands to fill the space.

For example, consider the cylinder of helium shown in **Figure 3.** It can fill about 700 balloons. The helium atoms in the cylinder have been forced close together, or *compressed*. But as the helium fills a balloon, the atoms spread out, and the amount of empty space between gas particles increases.

**What is one difference between liquids and gases?** (See Appendix E for answers to Reading Checks.)

### Plasma is the most common state of matter.

Scientists estimate that 99% of the known matter in the universe, including the sun and other stars, is made of plasma. **Plasma** is a state of matter that does not have a definite shape or volume. Particles in plasma are electrically charged, or *ionized*. Natural plasmas are found in lightning, fire, and the aurora borealis shown in **Figure 4**. The glow of fluorescent light is caused by artificial plasma, which is formed by passing electric currents through gases.

Plasmas are similar to gases but have some properties that are different from the properties of gases. For instance, plasmas conduct electric current, while gases do not.

**Figure 3** The particles of helium gas in the cylinder are much closer together than the particles of the gas in the balloons.

**fluid** (FLOO id) a nonsolid state of matter in which the atoms or molecules are free to move past each other, as in a gas or liquid

plasma (PLAZ muh) a state of matter that consists of free-moving ions and electrons

Figure 4 Auroras form when high-energy plasma collides with gas particles in the upper atmosphere. What other states of matter do you see in the photograph?

### **Energy's Role**

What sources of energy would you use if the electricity were off? You might use candles for light and batteries to power a clock. Electricity, candles, and batteries are sources of energy. The food you eat is also a source of energy. **Energy** is the ability to change or move matter, or to do *work*. The energy of motion is called *kinetic energy*.

According to kinetic theory, all matter is made of particles—atoms and molecules—that are constantly in motion.

• Because they are in motion, all particles of matter have kinetic energy. Figure 5 compares the kinetic energy of the particles in a solid, a liquid, and a gas.

### Temperature is a measure of average kinetic energy.

Do you think of temperature as a measure of how hot or cold something is? Specifically, **temperature** is a measure of the average kinetic energy of the particles in an object. Particles of matter are <u>constantly</u> moving, but they do not all move at the same speed. As a result, some particles have more kinetic energy than others have. When you measure an object's temperature, you measure the average kinetic energy of the particles in the object. The more kinetic energy the particles of an object have, the higher the temperature of the object is.

Reading Check What does temperature measure?

### **Academic Vocabulary**

**constant** (KAHN stuhnt) without interruption; continual

Figure 5 Kinetic Energy of Solids, Liquids, and Gases

The particles in an ice cube vibrate in place. Compared to the particles in liquids and gases, they have the least kinetic energy.

The particles in ocean water move around. They have more kinetic energy than the particles in a solid but less than those in a gas.

The particles in steam move around rapidly. Compared to the particles in solids and liquids, they have the most kinetic energy.

### Quick Lab

### Hot or Cold?

### ( 10 min

### **Procedure**

- You will need three buckets: one with warm water, one with cold water, and one with hot water. CAUTION: Test a drop of the hot water to make sure that it is not too hot to put your hands into.
- Put both of your hands into the bucket of warm water, and note how the water feels.
- 3 Now, put one hand into the bucket of cold water and the other into the bucket of hot water.
- After a minute, take your hands out of the hot and cold water, and put them back in the warm water.

### **Analysis**

1. Can you rely on your hands to determine temperature? Explain your observations.

# Thermal energy depends on particle speed and number of particles.

The temperature of a substance is not determined by how much of the substance you have. For example, a teapot holds more tea than a mug does. But the temperature, or average kinetic energy, of the particles in the tea is the same in both containers. However, the total kinetic energy of the particles in each container is different. The total kinetic energy of the particles that make up a substance is **thermal energy**.

Because particles of matter move faster at higher temperatures than they do at lower temperatures, the faster the particles in a substance move, the more kinetic energy they have. However, the *total* kinetic energy (thermal energy) of a substance depends on the number of particles in that substance. Look back at **Figure 5.** Although the individual particles in the steam have the most kinetic energy, the ocean has the greatest thermal energy because it contains so many more particles.

energy (EN uhr jee) the capacity to do

**temperature** (TEM puhr uh chuhr) a measure of how hot (or cold) something is; specifically, a measure of the average kinetic energy of the particles in an object

**thermal energy** (THUHR muhl EN uhr jee) the total kinetic energy of a substance's atoms

# Section 1 Review

### **KEY IDEAS**

- List three main points of the kinetic theory of matter.
- 2. **State** two examples for each of the four states of
- Compare the shape and volume of solids, liquids, and gases.
- Describe the relationship between temperature and kinetic energy.

### **CRITICAL THINKING**

- 5. Compare and Contrast Compare the temperature and thermal energy of hot soup in a small mug and that of hot soup in a large bowl.
- 6. Applying Concepts Which particles have the strongest attraction between them: the particles of a gas, the particles of a liquid, or the particles of a solid?
- **7. Making Inferences** Use the kinetic theory to explain how a dog could find you by your scent.

Why It Matters

# Plasma

We are surrounded by matter in one of three states: solid, liquid, and gas. But 99.9% of all matter in the universe, including the sun and all other stars, is plasma. Matter in the plasma state is a collection of free-moving electrons and ions, or atoms that have lost electrons. Plasmas conduct electricity and are affected by magnets. They require an energy source to exist. This energy may be a heat source, such as the heat of the sun; an electric current; or a strong light, such as a laser.

The sun is a giant ball of superheated plasma. On its surface, violent eruptions send waves of plasma streaming out into space at high speeds. Earth is bathed in waves of plasma known as solar wind. After periods of disturbance on the surface of the sun, strong solar winds can disrupt radio and telephone communications, damage orbiting satellites, and cause electrical blackouts. Scientists are working to understand the forces behind solar wind and hope to better forecast damaging solar wind that is headed toward Earth.

Some plasmas, including lightning and fire, occur naturally on Earth. Artificial plasmas, including fluorescent and neon lights, are created by running an electric current through a gas to change the gas into a plasma that emits light. When the current is removed, the plasma becomes a gas again.

Scientists hope to someday harness nuclear fusion—the process that powers the sun and other stars. Fusion occurs at very high temperatures, so the fuel for fusion is a plasma. In the Tokamak Fusion Reactor, shown here, the plasma is heated in a ring-shaped vessel. Strong magnetic fields keep the plasma from touching the walls. Scientists study the plasma to learn more about fusion as a possible future energy source on Earth.

### **CRITICAL THINKING**

1. Why do you think scientists want to predict solar winds in Earth's atmosphere?

### **ONLINE RESEARCH**

2. Research the Tokamak Fusion Reactor, and answer the following questions: What do scientists hope to achieve with this research? What challenges do scientists face when studying plasma?

www.scilinks.org
Topic: Plasma

Topic: Plasma Code: HK81169

