---
chapter: 1
chapter_title: Introduction to Science
section: 6
section_title: Changes of State
---

# **Changes of State**

### **Key Ideas**

- What happens when a substance changes from one state of matter to another?
- What happens to mass and energy during physical and chemical changes?

### Key **Terms**

evaporation sublimation condensation

### Why It **Matters**

The evaporation that occurs when you sweat helps to keep your body cool in warm weather.

What causes dew drops to form or causes ice to melt? These changes of state—conversions of a substance from one physical form to another—are caused by energy transfers.

### **Energy and Changes of State**

Five changes of state of water are shown in **Figure 1.** The ice, liquid water, and steam are all the same substance—water,  $H_2O$ . But they all have different amounts of energy. The identity of a substance does not change during a change of state, but the energy of a substance does change.

If energy is added to a substance, its particles move faster. If energy is removed, the substance's particles move slower. For instance, the particles in steam have more energy than the particles in liquid water. A transfer of energy known as *heat* causes the temperature of a substance to change. If enough energy is added or removed, the substance will change state.

evaporation (ee VAP uh RAY shuhn) the change of state from a liquid to a gas sublimation (SUHB luh MAY shuhn) the process in which a solid changes directly into a gas

# **Some changes of state require energy.**A solid changes to a liquid by melting. Heating a solid

a liquid boils is the liquid's boiling point.

You can feel the effects of an energy change when you sweat. Energy is needed to separate the particles of a liquid to form a gas. As you sweat, energy from your body is transferred to sweat molecules as heat. This energy transfer

depends on the pressure.

Why It **Matters** 

cools your body.

Nitrogen molecule in air

Sweat droplet

The molecules in sweat on your skin gain energy from your body and move faster. Eventually, the fastest-moving particles break away, and the sweat evaporates. This loss of energy by the body makes

the body feel cooler.

transfers energy to the particles, which vibrate faster as they gain energy. Eventually, they break from their fixed positions,

and the solid melts. The *melting point* is the temperature at which a substance changes from solid to liquid. Melting point

Solids can also change directly into gases in a process

called **sublimation.** In **Figure 2**, solid carbon dioxide (dry ice)

Do People Sweat?

Water vapor in air

Oxygen molecule in air

changes into gaseous carbon dioxide. Ice cubes in a freezer

will eventually get smaller, as the ice sublimes. Note that melting, evaporation, and sublimation all require energy.

Reading Check What is one example of sublimation?

**Evaporation** is the change of a substance from a liquid to a gas. Boiling is evaporation that occurs throughout a liquid at a specific temperature and pressure. The temperature at which

Figure 2 Solid dry ice changes

of state is shown here?

YOUR

**CRITICAL THINKING**1. Does your body take in

energy or give off energy

during sweating? Explain.

directly into a gas. Which change

### INKS.

w.scilinks.org

**Figure 5** Energy is conserved when gasoline is burned to power

Section 2 Review

**1. Describe** the following changes of state, and

explain how particles behave in each state.

2. State whether energy is released or whether energy

is required for the following changes of state to take

States of Matter

c. sublimation

c. sublimation

d. condensation

d. melting

a lawn mower.

**KEY IDEAS** 

a. freezing

**b.** boiling

a. melting

b. evaporation

Chapter 3

place.

88

Topic: Conservation of Energy

Code: HK80345

### Mass cannot be created or destroyed.

of mass.

servation of energy.

energy that is produced.

transferred to the surroundings as heat.

In chemical changes, as well as in physical changes, the total mass of the substances undergoing the change stays the same before and after the change. In other words, mass can-

not be created or destroyed, which is the *law of conservation* 

For instance, when you burn a match, it seems to lose mass. The ash has less mass than the match. But the oxygen that reacts with the match, the tiny smoke particles, and the gases formed in the reaction also have mass. The total mass of the reactants (the match and oxygen) is the same as the total

Energy may be changed to another form during a physical

or chemical change, but the total amount of energy present

before and after the change is the same. In other words, energy cannot be created or destroyed, which is the *law of con-*

Starting a lawn mower, as **Figure 5** shows, may seem to violate the law of conservation of energy, but that is not the case. It is true that for the small amount of energy needed to start the mower, a lot of energy results. But the mower needs gasoline to run. Gasoline has stored energy that is released when it is burned. When the stored energy is considered, the energy present before you start the lawn mower is equal to the

Some of the energy from the gasoline is transferred to the surroundings as heat, which is why the lawn mower gets hot. The total amount of energy released by the gasoline is equal to the energy used to power the lawn mower plus the energy

Describe the role of energy when ice melts and when water vapor condenses to form liquid water.

4. State the law of conservation of mass and the law

of conservation of energy, and explain how they

5. Drawing Conclusions If you used dry ice in your

holiday punch, would it become watery after an

apply to changes of state.

hour? Why or why not?

**CRITICAL THINKING** 

mass of the products (the ash, smoke, and gases).

**Energy cannot be created or destroyed.** 

# QuickLab

### **Density and Shape**

### **Procedure**

- Roll two equal pieces of clay into two balls (the size of golf balls).
   Drop the first ball into a container of water. Record your observations.
- 2 Flatten the second ball until it is thinner than your little finger, and press it into the shape of a canoe.

3 Place the clay boat gently into the water. Record your observations.

### **Analysis**

- 1. How does the change of shape affect the buoyant force?
- 2. How is the change of shape related to the overall density of the boat?

### An object will float or sink based on its density.

You can also determine if a substance will float or sink by comparing densities. For example, the density of a brick is about  $2 \, \text{g/cm}^3$ , and the density of water is  $1.00 \, \text{g/cm}^3$ . The brick will sink in water because it is denser than the water. On the other hand, helium has about one-seventh the density of air. A given volume of helium in a balloon displaces a volume of air that is much heavier than helium, so the balloon floats.

Steel is almost eight times denser than water. And yet huge steel ships cruise the oceans with ease. They even carry very heavy loads. But substances that are denser than water will sink in water. Given this, how does a steel ship float?

The shape of the ship allows the ship to float. Imagine a ship that was just a big block of steel, as shown on the left in **Figure 4.** If you put that steel block into water, it would sink. But ships are built with a hollow shape. The amount of steel is the same, but the hollow shape decreases the ship's density. Water is denser than the hollow ship, so the ship floats.

Reading Check How can you use density to determine if an object will float?

### Integrating **Biology**

Swim Bladders Some fish can adjust their density so that they can stay at a certain depth in the water. Most fish have an organ called a swim bladder, which is filled with gases. The inflated swim bladder increases the fish's volume, decreases the fish's overall density, and keeps the fish from sinking. The fish's nervous system controls the amount of gas in the bladder based on the fish's depth. Some fish, such as sharks, do not have a swim bladder. So, they must swim constantly to keep from sinking.

### READING TOOLBOX

### **Laws and Principles**

Write down all of the scientific laws or principles that are covered in this section. State each one in your own words, and list the conditions under which the law or principle is true.

### **Pascal's Principle**

What happens when you squeeze one end of a tube of toothpaste? Toothpaste usually comes out the opposite end because the pressure you apply is transmitted throughout the toothpaste. So, the increased pressure near the open end of the tube forces the toothpaste out. This phenomenon is explained by Pascal's principle, which was discovered by the French scientist Blaise Pascal in the 17th century.

Pascal's principle

A change in pressure at any point in an enclosed fluid will be transmitted equally to all parts of the fluid.

In other words, if the pressure in a container is increased at any point, the pressure increases at all points by the same amount. Mathematically, Pascal's principle is stated as  $P_1 = P_2$ . Because P = F/A, Pascal's principle can be expressed  $F_1/A_1 = F_2/A_2$ .

### Hydraulic devices are based on Pascal's principle.

Hydraulic devices use liquids to transmit pressure from one point to another. Because liquids cannot be compressed into a much smaller space, they can transmit pressure more efficiently than gases can. Hydraulic devices can multiply forces. For example, in Figure 5, a small downward force is applied to a small area. This force exerts pressure on the liquid in the device, such as oil. According to Pascal's principle, this pressure is transmitted equally to a larger area, where the pressure creates a larger force. Note that the plunger travels through a larger distance on the side that has the smaller area.

Reading Check How does a hydraulic device multiply force?

**Figure 5** Because the pressure is the same on both sides of the enclosed fluid in a hydraulic lift, a small force on the smaller area (left) produces a much larger force on the larger area (right).

### Math Skills Pascal's Principle

A hydraulic lift uses Pascal's principle to lift a 19,000 N car. If the area of the small piston  $(A_1)$  equals 10.5 cm<sup>2</sup> and the area of the large piston  $(A_2)$  equals 400 cm<sup>2</sup>, what force needs to be exerted on the small piston to lift the car?

| er | • |
|----|---|
|    |   |
|    |   |

List the given and unknown values.

### Given:

$$\begin{split} F_2 &= 19,000 \ \mathrm{N} \\ A_1 &= 10.5 \ \mathrm{cm}^2 \\ A_2 &= 400 \ \mathrm{cm}^2 \end{split}$$

### Unknown:

$$F_1 = ? N$$

### Plan

Start with Pascal's principle, and substitute the equation for pressure. Then, rearrange the equation to isolate the unknown value.

$$P_1 = P_2$$

$$\frac{F_1}{A_1} = \frac{F_2}{A_2}$$

$$F_1 = \frac{(F_2)(A_1)}{A_2}$$

### Solve

Insert the known values into the equation, and solve.

$$F_1 = \frac{(19,000 \text{ N})(10.5 \text{ cm}^2)}{400 \text{ cm}^2}$$

$$F_1 = 500 \text{ N}$$

### **Practice**

1. In a car's liquid-filled, hydraulic brake system, the master cylinder has an area of 0.5 cm<sup>2</sup>, and the wheel cylinders each have an area of 3.0 cm<sup>2</sup>. If a force of 150 N is applied to the master cylinder by the brake pedal, what force does each wheel cylinder exert on its brake pad?

For more practice, visit go.hrw.com and enter keyword HK8MP.

### Practice **Hint**

> The pressure equation

$$pressure = \frac{force}{area}$$

can be used to find pressure or can be rearranged to find force or area.

$$force = (pressure)(area)$$

$$area = \frac{force}{pressure}$$

### **Fluids in Motion**

Examples of moving fluids include liquids flowing through pipes, air moving as wind, or honey dripping, as **Figure 6** shows. Fluids in motion have some properties in common. Have you ever used a garden hose? When you place your thumb over the end of the hose, your thumb blocks some of the area through which the water flows out of the hose. Because the area is smaller, the water exits at a faster speed.

> Fluids move faster through small areas than through larger areas, if the overall flow rate remains constant. Fluids also vary in the rate at which they flow.

**Figure 6** Dripping honey is an example of a fluid in motion.

**viscosity** (vis KAHS uh tee) the resistance of a gas or liquid to flow

Figure 7 This leaf speeds up when it enters the narrow part of the pipe, where there is less pressure. How does this example illustrate Bernoulli's principle?

### Viscosity depends on particle attraction.

Honey dripping from a spoon flows more slowly than lemonade poured from a pitcher. A liquid's resistance to flow is called **viscosity.** In general, the stronger the attraction between a liquid's particles is, the more viscous the liquid is. Honey flows more slowly than lemonade because honey has a higher viscosity than lemonade.

### Fluid pressure decreases as speed increases.

Imagine a waterlogged leaf being carried along by water in a pipe, as **Figure 7** shows. The water will move faster through the narrow part of the pipe than through the wider part. Therefore, as the water carries the leaf into the narrow part of the pipe, the leaf moves faster.

If you measure the pressure at different points, you would find that the water pressure in front of the leaf is less than the pressure behind the leaf. The pressure difference causes the leaf and the water around it to accelerate as the leaf enters the narrow part of the tube. This behavior illustrates a general principle, known as *Bernoulli's principle*, which states that as the speed of a moving fluid increases, the pressure of the moving fluid decreases. This property of moving fluids was first described in the 18th century by Daniel Bernoulli, a Swiss mathematician.

### Section 3 Review

### KEY IDEAS

- **1. Explain** how differences in fluid pressure create buoyant force on an object.
- **2. State** Archimedes' principle, and give an example of how you could determine a buoyant force.
- 3. State Pascal's principle. Give an example of its use.
- Compare the viscosity of milk and the viscosity of molasses.

### **CRITICAL THINKING**

- Applying Concepts An object weighs 20 N. It displaces a volume of water that weighs 15 N.
  - a. What is the buoyant force on the object?
  - **b.** Will the object float or sink? Explain.
- 6. Drawing Conclusions Iron has a density of 7.9 g/cm<sup>3</sup>. Mercury has a density of 13.6 g/cm<sup>3</sup>. Will iron float or sink in mercury? Explain.

- Making Inferences Two boats in a flowing river are sailing side-by-side with only a narrow space between them.
  - a. What happens to the fluid speed and the pressure between the two boats?
  - **b.** How could the changes in fluid speed and pressure lead to a collision of the boats?

### Math Skills

- **8.** A water bed that has an area of 3.75 m<sup>2</sup> weighs 1,025 N. Find the pressure that the water bed exerts on the floor.
- 9. The small piston of a hydraulic lift has an area of 0.020 m<sup>2</sup>. A car weighing 12,000 N is mounted on the large piston (area = 0.90 m<sup>2</sup>). What force must be applied to the small piston to support the car?

Why It Matters

# **How Do Submarines Work?**

A submarine is a type of ship that can travel both on the surface of the

water and underwater. Submarines have special ballast tanks that control their buoyancy. The crew can control the amount of water in the tanks to control the submarine's depth, as shown below. The first submarine was used in 1776 during the American

Revolution. It was a one-person, hand-powered, wooden vessel. Most modern submarines are built of metals and use nuclear power, which

enables them to remain submerged almost indefinitely.

When a submarine is floating on the

surface, its ballast tanks are filled mostly with air. Ballast tanks

When the submarine dives, the ballast tanks are opened to allow sea water to flow in. This water adds

mass and increases the submarine's density, so the submarine descends into the ocean.

**UNDERSTANDING CONCEPTS** 1. How do submarines use ballast

tanks to control their depth? **CRITICAL THINKING** 2. Identify the advantages of using metals instead of wood in the construction of today's

To bring the submarine through the water and to the surface, compressed air is blown into the

ballast tanks to force the water out.

submarines.

www.scilinks.org Topic: Submarines and Undersea Technology Code: HK81474

95

### The product of pressure and volume is constant.

Boyle's law tells you that when pressure increases, volume decreases, and vice versa. In mathematical terms, pressure multiplied by volume is constant (if temperature is constant). This is expressed as follows:

$$(pressure_1)(volume_1) = (pressure_2)(volume_2)$$
  
 $P_1V_1 = P_2V_2$ 

 $P_1$  and  $V_1$  represent the <u>initial</u> volume and pressure, while  $P_2$  and  $V_2$  represent the final volume and pressure.

### **Academic Vocabulary**

initial (i NISH uhl) first final (FIEN uhl) last

# SCI<sub>INKS</sub>.

### www.scilinks.org

Topic: Gas Laws Code: HK80637

### Math Skills Boyle's Law

The gas in a balloon has a volume of 7.5 L at 100.0 kPa. In the atmosphere, the gas expands to a volume of 11 L. Assuming a constant temperature, what is the final pressure in the balloon?

### Identify

List the given and unknown values.

### Given:

$$\begin{split} V_1 &= 7.5 \; \mathrm{L} \\ P_1 &= 100.0 \; \mathrm{kPa} \\ V_2 &= 11 \; \mathrm{L} \end{split}$$

### Unknown:

$$P_2 =$$
? kPa

### Plan

Write the equation for Boyle's law, and rearrange to solve for  $P_2$ .

$$P_1V_1 = P_2V_2$$

$$P_2\!=\!\frac{P_1V_1}{V_2}$$

### Solve

Insert the known values into the equation, and solve.

$$P_2 = \frac{(100.0 \text{ kPa})(7.5 \text{ L})}{11 \text{ L}}$$

$$P_2 = 68 \text{ kPa}$$

### Practice

- 1. A flask contains 155 cm<sup>3</sup> of hydrogen at a pressure of 22.5 kPa. Under what pressure would the gas have a volume of 90.0 cm<sup>3</sup> at the same temperature? (Recall that 1 cm<sup>3</sup> = 1 mL.)
- 2. If the pressure exerted on a 300.0 mL sample of hydrogen gas at constant temperature is increased from 0.500 kPa to 0.750 kPa, what will be the final volume of the sample?
- 3. A sample of oxygen gas has a volume of 150 mL at a pressure of 0.947 kPa. If the temperature remains constant, what will the volume of the gas be at a pressure of 1.000 kPa?

For more practice, visit **go.hrw.com** and enter keyword **HK8MP**.

### Practice **Hint**

Problems 2 and 3: The equation for Boyle's law can be rearranged to solve for volume in the following way.

Start with the equation for Boyle's Law:

$$P_1V_1 = P_2V_2$$

Divide both sides by P<sub>2</sub>:

$$\frac{P_1 V_1}{P_2} = \frac{P_2 V_2}{P_2}$$

After you cancel like terms, you are left with the final volume.

$$\frac{P_1 V_1}{P_2} = V_2$$

### Gay-Lussac's law relates gas pressure to temperature.

What would you predict about the relationship between the pressure and temperature of a gas at constant volume? Remember that pressure is the result of collisions of gas molecules against the walls of their containers. As temperature increases, the kinetic energy of the gas particles increases. The energy and frequency of the collision of gas particles against their containers increases. For a fixed quantity of gas at constant volume, the pressure increases as the temperature increases. This property of gases is sometimes known as Gay-Lussac's law.

Gay-Lussac's law The pressure of a gas increases as the temperature increases, if the volume of the gas does not change. The pressure decreases as the temperature decreases.

If you often measure the pressure in your bicycle tire, as **Figure 3** shows, you may notice that the tire pressure in the winter is lower than it is in the summer. As the temperature outside decreases, the tire pressure also decreases. When the temperature outside rises, the tire pressure rises. Notice that in this example, the volume is constant.

If pressurized containers that hold gases, such as spray cans, are heated, the containers may explode. You should always be careful to keep containers of pressurized gas away from heat sources.

Reading Check If volume is constant and temperature decreases, how does pressure change?

**Procedure** 

Figure 3 The pressure in a bicycle tire increases when temperature increases. Which gas law does this illustrate?

# Inquiry Lab

# How Are Temperature and Volume Related?

### 20 mars (1900) 4 1 20 m 44 20 m (4) 2 m m 20 m 1

- Fill an aluminum pan with 5 cm of water. Put the pan on a hot plate.
- 2 Fill a second aluminum pan with 5 cm of ice water.
- 3 Blow up a balloon inside a 250 mL beaker. The balloon should fill the beaker but should not extend outside it. Tie the balloon at its opening.
- Place the beaker and balloon in the ice water. Record your observations.

Semove the balloon and beaker from the ice water. Observe the balloon for several minutes, and record any changes.

( 30 min

Next, put the beaker and balloon in the hot water. Record your observations.

### **Analysis**

- 1. How did changing the temperature affect the volume of the balloon?
- **2.** Is the density of a gas affected by temperature? Explain.

Figure 4 Charles's Law

When the temperature is decreased, the gas particles move more slowly and hit the sides of the piston with less force. As a result, the volume decreases.

When the temperature is increased, the gas particles move faster and hit the sides of the piston with more force. As a result, the volume increases.

### Charles's law relates temperature to volume.

Another gas law, Charles's law, is shown by the model in **Figure 4.** Each illustration shows the same piston and the same amount of gas at the same pressure.

Charles's law For a fixed amount of gas at a constant pressure, the volume of the gas increases as the gas's temperature increases. Likewise, the volume of the gas decreases as the gas's temperature decreases.

Because of Charles's law, an inflated balloon will pop when it gets too hot. Or, as **Figure 5** shows, if the gas in an inflated balloon is cooled (at constant pressure), the volume of gas will decrease and cause the volume of the balloon to shrink. You can observe another example by putting an inflated balloon in the freezer and waiting about 10 minutes to see what happens.

**Figure 5** This experiment illustrates Charles's law.

Air-filled balloons are exposed to liquid nitrogen.

The low temperature of the liquid nitrogen makes the balloons shrink in volume.

When the balloons are removed from the liquid nitrogen and warmed, they expand to their original volume.

### **Graphing Skills Interpreting Graphs**

The top graph shows volume versus temperature for a gas at a constant pressure. What can be determined from this graph about the relationship between volume and temperature?

In a direct relationship, the two variables change in the same direction. In an inverse relationship, they change in opposite directions. In this graph, temperature increases as volume increases, so the relationship is direct.

2 Study the shape of the line.

If a graph is a straight line, one variable is directly or inversely proportional to the other. If a graph is a curve, the relationship is more complex. Because this graph is a straight line, temperature is directly proportional to volume.

### **Practice**

- 1. Which gas law does the straight-line graph represent?
- 2. Is the relationship shown by the curve in the bottom graph a direct relationship or an inverse relationship?
- 3. Is this relationship proportional?
- 4. Which gas law is represented by the curved graph?

### Volume Versus Temperature for a Gas at a Constant Pressure 0.700 0.600 0.500 0.400 0.300 0.200 0.100 0.000 100 200 300 Temperature (K)

# Section 4 Review

### **KEY IDEAS**

- 1. List four properties of gases.
- 2. Explain why the volume of a gas can change.
- 3. Describe how gases are different from solids and liquids, and give examples.
- 4. Identify what causes the pressure exerted by gas molecules on their container.
- 5. Restate Boyle's law, Charles's law, and Gay-Lussac's law in your own words.

### **CRITICAL THINKING**

- 6. Applying Concepts Identify a real-life example for each of the three gas laws.
- 7. Making Inferences Why do gases have low densities?

- 8. Relating Concepts When scientists record the volume of a gas, why do they also record the temperature and the pressure?
- **9. Making Predictions** Predict what would happen to the volume of a balloon left on a sunny windowsill. Which gas law predicts this result?

### Math Skills

10. A partially inflated weather balloon has a volume of 1.56  $\times$  10<sup>3</sup> L and a pressure of 98.9 kPa. What is the volume of the balloon when the balloon is released to a height where the pressure is 44.1 kPa?

What You'll Do

> Test your hypothesis by

measuring the temperature of water as it boils and freezes.

> Graph data, and interpret the

slopes of the graphs.

What You'll Need

beaker, 250 mL or 400 mL

graduated cylinder, 100 mL

stirring device, wire loop

102 Chapter 3

States of Matter

clamp

hot plate

ice, crushed

paper, graph

ring stand

rock salt

stopwatch

Safety

water

thermometer

coffee can, large

gloves, heat-resistant

🍪 50 min

**Boiling and Freezing** Adding or removing energy from a substance often causes its tempera-

ture to change. But does the temperature of a substance always change when the substance's energy changes? In this lab, you will investigate this question with a common substance-water.

Ask a Question

When you add or remove energy from water, does its temperature always change?

**Forming and Testing a Hypothesis** 

Make some predictions. What happens to the temperature of boiling water as the boiling process continues? What happens to the temperature of freezing water as the freezing process continues?

**Boiling Water** Prepare two data tables like the one below. (Note that you can also use Time and Temperature as column headings, to create a vertical table.) You will need to add additional cells for the time

steadily boiling.

measurements. Sample Data Table: Temperature of Water Time (s)

WRIT Temperature (°C) DO NOT Fill the beaker about one-third to one-half full with water.

Put on heat-resistant gloves. Turn on the hot plate, and put the beaker on the plate. Put the thermometer in the beaker. Use the clamp on the ring stand to hold the thermometer so that it does not touch the bottom of the beaker. CAUTION: Be careful not to touch

the hot plate. Also, be careful not to break the thermometer. In your first data table, record the temperature of the water every 30 s. Continue doing this until about one-fourth of the water boils away. Note the first temperature reading at which the water is

Turn off the hot plate. Let the beaker cool for a few minutes. Then, use heat-resistant gloves to pick up the beaker. Pour the warm water out in the sink, and rinse the warm beaker with cool water.

150

IN BOOK

180

etc

CAUTION: Even after rinsing the beaker with cool water, the beaker may still be too hot to handle without gloves.

**Key Ideas** 

> Kinetic Theory All matter is made of atoms and

States of Matter You can classify matter as a solid, a liquid, or a gas by determining whether the shape

molecules that are always in motion. (p. 77)

and volume are definite or variable. (p. 78)
 Energy's Role Because they are in motion, all particles of matter have kinetic energy. (p. 80)

> Energy and Changes of State The identity of a

can be created or destroyed. (p. 87)

points by the same amount. (p. 92)

rate remains constant. (p. 93)

directions. (p. 89)

situations. (p. 97)

force on matter. (p. 90)

**Pressure** Fluids exert pressure evenly in all

**Buoyant Force** All fluids exert an upward buoyant

**Pascal's Principle** If the pressure in a container is increased at any point, the pressure increases at all

> Fluids in Motion Fluids move faster through small areas than through larger areas, if the overall flow

> Properties of Gases Gases expand to fill their containers. They have low densities, are

compressible, and are mostly empty space. (p. 96)
 Gas Laws The gas laws will help you understand and predict the behavior of gases in specific

substance does not change during a change of state, but the energy of a substance does change. (p. 84)
 Conservation of Mass and Energy Mass and energy are both conserved. Neither mass nor energy

Section 1 Matter and Energy

Section 2 Changes of State

Section 4 Behavior of Gases

Section 3 Fluids

Key Terms fluid, p. 79

plasma, p. 79

energy, p. 80

temperature, p. 80 thermal energy, p. 81

evaporation, p. 85 sublimation, p. 85

condensation, p. 86

pressure, p. 89 pascal, p. 89

viscosity, p. 94

gas laws, p. 97

States of Matter

105

buoyant force, p. 90

