---
chapter: 2
chapter_title: The Structure of Atoms
section: 1
section_title: The Structure of Atoms
---

# The Structure of Atoms

### Key Ideas

- What is the difference between protons, neutrons, and electrons?
- What do atoms of an element have in common with other atoms of the same element?
- Why do isotopes of the same element have different atomic masses?
- > What unit is used to express atomic mass?

### **Key Terms**

proton
neutron
atomic number
mass number\nisotope\nunified atomic
mass unit
mole

### Why It Matters

Radioisotopes emit energy when they decay. To diagnose and treat diseases, doctors use this property of radioisotopes to track where in the body certain atoms go.

Less than 100 years after Dalton published his atomic theory, scientists determined that atoms consisted of smaller particles, such as the electron. In this section, you will learn more about the particles inside the atom.

### What Is in an Atom?

Atoms are made up of various subatomic particles. To understand the chemistry of most substances, however, we need to study only three of these particles. The three main subatomic particles are distinguished by mass, charge, and location in the atom. Figure 1 compares these particles.

At the center of each atom is a small, dense *nucleus*. The nucleus is made of **protons**, which have a positive charge, and **neutrons**, which have no charge. Protons and neutrons are almost identical in size and mass. Moving around outside the nucleus is a cloud of very tiny, negatively charged *electrons*. The mass of an electron is much smaller than that of a proton or neutron.

**Figure 1 Subatomic Particles** 

| Particle | Charge | Mass (kg)                | Location in the atom |
|----------|--------|--------------------------|----------------------|
| Proton   | +1     | 1.67 × 10 <sup>-27</sup> | in the nucleus       |
| Neutron  | 0      | 1.67 × 10 <sup>-27</sup> | in the nucleus       |
| Electron | -1     | 9.11 × 10 <sup>-31</sup> | outside the nucleus  |

proton (PROH TAHN) a subatomic particle that has a positive charge and that is located in the nucleus of an atom neutron (NOO TRAHN) a subatomic particle that has no charge and that is located in the nucleus of an atom

Figure 2 Helium atoms, including the ones in this helium blimp, are made up of two protons, two neutrons, and two electrons. Which of these particles defines the element as helium?

### **Academic Vocabulary**

overall (OH vuhr AWL) total; net

### Each element has a unique number of protons.

A hydrogen atom has one proton. A helium atom, shown in **Figure 2**, has two protons. Lithium has three protons. As you move through the periodic table of the elements, this pattern continues. Each element has a unique number of protons. In fact, an element is defined by the number of protons in an atom of that element.

### Unreacted atoms have no overall charge.

Even though the protons and electrons in atoms have electric charges, most atoms do not have an <u>overall</u> charge. The reason is that most atoms have an equal number of protons and electrons, whose charges exactly cancel. For example, a helium atom has two protons and two electrons. The atom is neutral because the positive charge of the two protons exactly cancels the negative charge of the two electrons, as shown below.

Charge of two protons: +2Charge of two neutrons: 0Charge of two electrons: -2Total charge of a helium atom: 0

If an atom gains or loses electrons, it becomes charged. A charged atom is called an *ion*.

### The electric force holds the atom together.

Positive and negative charges attract each other with a force known as the *electric force*. Because protons are positive and electrons are negative, protons and electrons are attracted to one another by the electric force. In fact, the electric force between protons in the nucleus and electrons outside the nucleus holds the atom together. On a larger scale, this same force holds solid and liquid materials together. For instance, electric attractions hold water molecules together.

### **Atomic Number and Mass Number**

Atoms of different elements have their own unique structures. Because these atoms have different structures, they have different properties. Atoms of the same element can vary in structure, too. > Atoms of each element have the same number of protons, but they can have different numbers of neutrons.

### The atomic number equals the number of protons.

The **atomic number** of an element, Z, tells you how many protons are in an atom of the element. Remember that most atoms are neutral because they have an equal number of protons and electrons. Thus, the atomic number also equals the number of electrons in the atom. Because each element is defined by its unique number of protons, each element has a unique atomic number. Hydrogen has only one proton, so Z=1 for hydrogen. The largest naturally occurring element, uranium, has 92 protons, so Z=92 for uranium. The atomic number of a given element never changes.

# The mass number equals the total number of subatomic particles in the nucleus.

The **mass number** of an element, A, equals the number of protons plus the number of neutrons in an atom of the element. A fluorine atom has 9 protons and 10 neutrons, so A=19 for fluorine. Oxygen has 8 protons and 8 neutrons, so A=16 for oxygen. The mass number reflects the number of protons and neutrons (and not the number of electrons) because protons and neutrons provide most of the atom's mass. Although atoms of an element have the same atomic number, they can have different mass numbers because the number of neutrons can vary. **Figure 3** shows which subatomic particles in the nucleus of an atom contribute to the atomic number and which contribute to the mass number.

Reading Check Which defines an element: the atomic number of the element or the mass number of the element?

atomic number (uh TAHM ik NUHM buhr) the number of protons in the nucleus of an atom

mass number (MAS NUHM buhr) the sum of the numbers of protons and neutrons in the nucleus of an atom

### READING TOOLBOX

### **Pyramid FoldNote**

Create a Pyramid FoldNote for the terms *proton*, *neutron*, and *electron*, and describe which can vary for a given element. Also include the terms *atomic number* and *mass number* in your notes.

**Figure 3** Atoms of the same element have the same number of protons and thus the same atomic number. But because the number of neutrons may vary, atoms of the same element may have different mass numbers.

Quick Lab

www.scilinks.org

Topic: Isotopes

Code: HK80820

mass)

**Modeling Isotopes** 

colors to represent protons, neu-

trons, and electrons. Use tooth-

**Procedure** 

together.

tritium (A = 3).

Use gumdrops of three different

(A = 3) and helium-4 (A = 4).

from the helium isotopes?

3 Create atomic models for helium-3

**Analysis** 

compare to one another?

Isotopes of Hydrogen

Deuterium

A = 2

1. How do the isotopes of hydrogen

2. How do the hydrogen isotopes differ

picks to hold the gumdrops

2 Create atomic models for the three

isotopes of hydrogen: protium

(A = 1), deuterium (A = 2), and

Isotopes

protons but a different number of neutrons relative to other atoms of the same element. Because they have the same number of protons and electrons, isotopes of an element have the same chemical properties. However, isotopes have differ-

ent masses. > Isotopes of an element vary in mass because their numbers of neutrons differ.

isotope (IE suh TOHP) an atom that has the same number of protons (or the same has one proton and one electron. The most common hydroatomic number) as other atoms of the same element do but that has a different number

gen isotope, protium, does not have any neutrons. Because it of neutrons (and thus a different atomic has one proton in its nucleus, its mass number, *A*, is 1. Deuterium, a second isotope of hydrogen, has one neutron as

well as one proton in its nucleus. Its mass number, A, is 2. A third isotope, tritium, has two neutrons. Because its nucleus contains two neutrons and one proton, tritium has a mass number of 3.

Reading Check Which hydrogen isotope has the most mass?

Figure 4 Each isotope of hydrogen has one proton, but

the number of neutrons varies. What is the atomic number,

Protium A = 1

3. Which isotopes have the same mass number? Which isotopes have the same atomic number?

As you have learned, atoms of a single element can have different numbers of neutrons and thus different mass numbers. An **isotope** is an atom that has the same number of

Each of the three isotopes of hydrogen, shown in Figure 4,

Tritium

A = 3

122

Z, of each isotope?

Atoms

Chapter 4

### The mole is useful for counting small particles.

Because chemists often deal with large numbers of small particles, they use a large counting unit called the **mole** (mol). A mole is a collection of a very large number of particles.

1 mol = 602, 213, 670, 000, 000, 000, 000, 000 particles

Amedeo Avogadro. Why is  $6.022 \times 10^{23}$  the number of par-

of atoms in 12.00 grams of carbon-12. Experiments have

stance contains  $6.022 \times 10^{23}$  particles of that substance.

shown this value to be  $6.022 \times 10^{23}$ . So, one mole of a sub-

ticles in one mole? The mole has been defined as the number

The following example demonstrates the magnitude of

Avogadro's number:  $6.022 \times 10^{23}$  popcorn kernels would cover

the United States to form a pile about 500 km (310 mi) tall! So,

popcorn kernels but is useful for counting atoms or molecules.

Avogadro's number is not useful for counting items such as

Reading Check How many particles are in 1 mol of iron?

The mass in grams of one mole of a substance is called *molar mass*. For example, 1 mol of carbon-12 atoms has a mass of 12.00 g, so the molar mass of carbon-12 is 12.00 g/mol.

In nature, elements often occur as mixtures of isotopes. So,

a mole of an element usually contains several isotopes. As a

result, an element's molar mass in grams per mole equals its

carbon has a mass of 12.01 g. Because this mass is a weighted

average of the masses of several isotopes of carbon, it differs

from the molar mass of carbon-12, which is a single isotope.

average atomic mass in unified atomic mass units, u. The

average atomic mass of carbon is 12.01 u. So, one mole of

Moles and grams are related.

**Figure 7** shows the molar mass of magnesium.

This number is usually written as  $6.022 \times 10^{23}$  and is called *Avogadro's number*. The number is named for Italian scientist

Integrating Space Science

**Counting Stars** How many stars are in the universe? In 2003, a group of

visible universe—the portion that our

astronomers estimated that the

telescopes can reach—contains

70,000,000,000,000,000,000,000 stars, or  $7 \times 10^{22}$  stars. This quantity

is about one-tenth of Avogadro's

telescopes. As improvements in telescopes occur, the estimate could

number! Of course, this estimate is

based on observations from existing

increase. Perhaps the estimate will

reach Avogadro's number someday.

unified atomic mass unit (YOON

uh FIED uh TAHM ik MAS YOON it) a unit of mass that describes the mass of an atom

or molecule; it is exactly 1/12 the mass of a

**mole** (MOHL) the SI base unit used to measure the amount of a substance whose

number of particles is the same as the

The Structure of Atoms

125

number of atoms of carbon in exactly 12 g

carbon atom with mass number 12

(symbol, u)

of carbon-12

**Figure 7** One mole of magnesium  $(6.022 \times 10^{23} \text{ Mg atoms})$  has a mass of 24.3050 g. Note that the balance is accurate only to one-tenth of a gram,

Section 2

so it reads 24.3 g.

Magnesium 24.3050

128

# Modern Atomic Theory

**Key Ideas** Key **Terms** Why It Matters What is the modern model of the atom? orbital Modern atomic theory explains why different valence electron How are the energy levels of an atom filled? elements produce differphoton > What makes an electron jump to a new energy level? ent colors in fireworks. alton's theory that the atom could not be split had to be modified after the discovery that atoms are made of protons, neutrons, and electrons. Like most scientific models and theories, the model of the atom has been revised many times to explain new discoveries. **Modern Models of the Atom** The modern model of the atom, which accounts for many new discoveries in the early 20th century, is very different from the model proposed by Rutherford. In the modern atomic model, electrons can be found only in certain en-Figure 1 The energy levels of an ergy levels, not between levels. Furthermore, the location atom are like the floors of the

of electrons cannot be predicted precisely. This model is not building shown here. The energy difference between energy levels as easy to visualize as the earlier models that you have studied. decreases as the energy level increases. **Electron location is limited to energy levels.** In 1913, Niels Bohr, a Danish physicist, suggested that the energy of each electron was related to the

electron's path around the nucleus. Electrons can be in 4th energy only certain energy levels. They must gain energy to level move to a higher energy level or must lose energy to 3rd energy move to a lower energy level. Bohr's description of level energy levels is still used by scientists today.

One way to imagine Bohr's model is to compare an 2nd energy level atom to the stairless building shown in Figure 1. Imagine that the nucleus is in a deep basement. The 1st energy energy levels begin on the first floor, above the basement. Electrons can be on any floor, but they cannot be

> elevator and lose energy by riding down. Chapter 4 Atoms

between floors. Electrons gain energy by riding up the

# Orbitals determine the number of electrons that each level can hold.

You have seen that each energy level contains a certain number of electrons. The orbitals in each energy level deter-

mine the total number of electrons that the level can hold, as

that this level contains four orbitals: one s orbital and three p

Total number

of orbitals

Number of electrons

8

18

32

 $\times 2 =$ 

**Figure 5** shows. For instance, you learned earlier that the second energy level can hold eight electrons. The reason is

orbitals. Because each orbital can hold two electrons, the

second energy level holds  $4 \times 2 = 8$  electrons.

Number of

orbitals by type

5

when an atom gains or loses energy.

3

**Electron Transitions** 

ground state to an excited state?

s p d

1

1 3

1 3 5

1

**Energy** 

level

2

3

4

Figure 5 Orbitals and Electrons for Energy Levels 1-4

1 = 1

1 + 3 = 4

1 + 3 + 5 = 9

1 + 3 + 5 + 7 = 16

As you have learned, the modern model of the atom limits

the location of electrons to specific energy levels. An electron is never found between these levels. Instead, it "jumps" from one level to the next. What makes an electron move from one level to another? > Electrons jump between energy levels

The lowest state of energy of an electron is called the *ground state*. At normal temperatures, most electrons are in the ground state. However, if an electron gains energy, it moves to an *excited state*. It gains energy by absorbing a par-

ticle of light, called a **photon.** The electron may then fall back

Photons of light have different energies. The energy of a

to a lower level. In doing so, the electron releases a photon.

photon determines to which level the electron will jump. Think back to the elevator analogy. When an electron absorbs a photon, it gains energy and "rides up the elevator." The energy of the photon determines the level up to which the electron rides. When the electron loses energy and "rides down the elevator," a photon is released. In this case, the change in levels determines the energy of the emitted photon. Electrons can move between any two levels of the atom.

\*\*Reading Check\*\* What makes an electron jump from the\*\*

QuickLab @20 min

Make a table that has 10 columns

and 4 rows. Label the first cell

"Energy level." Label the remaining

cells in the first row "s" (1 cell), "p" (3 cells), and "d" (5 cells). Label the

remaining cells in the first column

2 For each energy level, place an X in

3 Place **pennies** in empty cells to

can hold two "electrons."

represent electrons. Each "orbital"

Oraw Bohr models of atoms whose atomic numbers are 3, 5, 10, and 20. For each model, fill in the cells with the correct number of pennies

(in order) to see how the electrons

are located in the energy levels.

valence electron (VAY luhns ee LEK TRAHN) an electron that is found in the

determines the atom's chemical properties

photon (FOH TAHN) a unit or quantum of

outermost shell of an atom and that

Modern Atomic Theory

Section 3

131

cells that correspond to orbitals that are not found in that level.

**Electron Levels** 

"1," "2," and "3."

# Skills Practice

What You'll Do

isotopes.

periodic table

diameter (6)

diameter (4)

toothpicks (20)

134

Chapter 4

Atoms

> Build models of nuclei of certain

> Use the periodic table to determine

the composition of atomic nuclei.

What You'll Need

plastic-foam balls, blue, 2-3 cm in

plastic-foam balls, white, 2-3 cm in

**Building Isotopes** 

Imagine that you are an employee at the Elements-4-U Company, which custom builds models of elements. Your job is to construct a model of the atomic nucleus for each element ordered by your clients. You were

hired for the position because of your knowledge about what a nucleus is made of and your understanding of how isotopes of an element differ

from each other. Now, it's time to put that knowledge to work!

**Procedure Making the Simplest Nucleus** 

Copy the sample data table onto another sheet of paper. 2 Your first assignment is the nucleus of hydrogen-1. Pick up one proton (a white plastic-foam ball). Congratulations! You have built a

hydrogen-1 nucleus, the simplest nucleus possible. The atomic number of an element is the number of protons in an atom of the element. In your data table, record the atomic number and the number of neutrons for hydrogen-1.

Add the atomic number and the neutron number together to determine the mass number of hydrogen-1. Record this information in your table.

Oraw a picture of your hydrogen-1 model. **Building More-Complicated Nuclei** 

6 For the next part of the lab, you will need to use information from the periodic table of the elements. You can find the atomic number of any element at the top of the element's entry on the periodic

> table. For example, the atomic number of carbon is 6. Find the atomic number for each remaining isotope in the data table, and add this information to your table.

The name of the isotope tells you the mass number. For instance, the mass number of hydrogen-2 is 2, and the mass number of

helium-4 is 4. Determine the mass number for each remaining isotope in the data table, and add this information to your table.

3 Subtract the atomic number from the mass number to find the number of neutrons for each remaining isotope in the table.

### **Key Ideas**

# y Ideas Rey Tel

