---
chapter: 3
chapter_title: Exploring the Periodic Table
section: 1
section_title: Exploring the Periodic Table
---

# **Exploring the Periodic Table**

#### Key Ideas

- Why do elements within a group of the periodic table have similar chemical properties?
- What happens to an atom that gains or loses electrons?
- What are the three main categories of elements?

#### Key **Terms**

ion metal nonmetal semiconductor

#### Why It Matters

The properties of metals make metals useful for conducting electricity. For example, wires that carry electricity are made of metal.

Why is neon an unreactive element? Why is sodium so reactive that it reacts violently with moisture and oxygen in the air? These chemical properties are related to the number of electrons in each element.

#### The Role of Electrons

The periodic table is organized by atomic number, which is the number of protons in an atom. For a neutral atom, the number of protons equals the number of electrons. The periodic trends in the periodic table are the result of electron arrangement. Specifically, the chemical properties of each group are largely determined by the number of valence electrons. These electrons are closest to the outside of the atom and are sometimes considered part of an outer "shell" of electrons.

#### Valence electrons account for similar properties.

The number of valence electrons determines many of the chemical properties of an element. The diagrams in **Figure 1** show atoms of two elements from Group 1: lithium and sodium. Because they each have one valence electron, lithium and sodium have similar chemical properties. In general, elements in a group have chemical and physical properties in common because they have the same number of valence electrons. Of course, elements in a group are not exactly alike. They differ in numbers of protons in their nuclei and in numbers of electrons in their filled inner energy levels. As a result, the properties of elements in a group are not exactly the same.

Figure 1 These two elements in Group 1 each have one valence electron. What is the difference in the location of these electrons?

# READING TOOLBOX

#### **Root Words**

Use a dictionary or the Internet to find the root words for *hydrogen*, *helium*, and *lithium*. Explain how each root is related to the properties of that element.

# An element's location in the periodic table is related to electron arrangement.

You can find out how the electrons are arranged in the atoms of an element if you know where the element is located in the periodic table. Hydrogen and helium are in Period 1.

Figure 2 shows that a hydrogen atom has one electron in an s orbital and that a helium atom has two electrons in an s orbital. Lithium is located in Period 2. Like helium, lithium has two electrons in an s orbital. But lithium has a third electron, which is in an s orbital in the second energy level. The table below shows the electron arrangement of lithium.

| Element | Energy level | Orbital | Number of electrons |
|---------|--------------|---------|---------------------|
| 1.146.1 | 1            | S       | 2                   |
| Lithium | 2            | S       | 1                   |

As you move to the right in Period 2, electrons begin to fill the p orbitals. For instance, a carbon atom's six electrons are in two s orbitals and one p orbital, as shown in the table below.

| Element | Energy level | Orbital | Number of electrons |
|---------|--------------|---------|---------------------|
|         | 1            | s       | 2                   |
| Carbon  | 2            | S       | 2                   |
|         | 2            | р       | 2                   |

A nitrogen atom has three electrons in p orbitals, an oxygen atom has four, and a fluorine atom has five. **Figure 2** shows that a neon atom has six electrons in p orbitals. Each p orbital can hold two electrons, so neon's three p orbitals are filled.

#### **Ion Formation**

Atoms whose outermost orbitals are not filled may undergo a process called *ionization*. That is, such atoms may gain or lose valence electrons so that they have a filled outermost orbital. If an atom gains or loses electrons, it no longer has an equal number of electrons and protons. Because the charges do not cancel completely, the atom has a net electric charge. A charged atom is called an ion.

ion (IE AHN) an atom, radical, or molecule that has gained or lost one or more electrons and has a negative or positive charge

#### **Group 1 elements form positive ions.**

Lithium is a Group 1 element. Lithium is reactive in air, in water, and especially in acid. The atomic structure of lithium explains lithium's reactivity. A lithium atom has three electrons, as shown in the upper left diagram in **Figure 3**. Two of these electrons occupy the first energy level in the s orbital, but only one electron occupies the second energy level. This single valence electron is easily removed, which makes lithium very reactive. Removing this electron forms a positive ion, or *cation*, as shown in the upper right diagram in **Figure 3**. A lithium ion, written as Li<sup>+</sup>, has a filled outer s orbital.

Atoms of other Group 1 elements also have one valence electron. These elements are reactive and behave similarly to lithium.

#### **Group 17 elements form negative ions.**

Like lithium, fluorine is very reactive. Each fluorine atom has nine electrons. Two of these electrons occupy the first energy level. The other seven electrons—the valence electrons—are in the second energy level. A fluorine atom needs only one more electron to have a filled outermost energy level. An atom of fluorine easily gains this electron to form a negative ion, or *anion*, as the bottom diagram in **Figure 3** shows. Because an ion of fluorine has a filled outer energy level, the ion is more stable and less reactive than a fluorine atom.

Ions of fluorine, which have a 1– charge, are called *fluoride ions*. The symbol for the fluoride ion is F<sup>-</sup>. Because atoms of other Group 17 elements have seven valence electrons, other Group 17 elements are reactive and behave like fluorine, too.

Reading Check Why do Group 1 and Group 17 elements easily form ions?

**Figure 3** The valence electron of a lithium atom may be removed to form a lithium ion, Li<sup>+</sup>, which has a 1+ charge. A fluorine atom easily gains one valence electron to form a fluoride ion, F<sup>-</sup>, which has a 1– charge.

metal (MET'I) an element that is shiny and that conducts heat and electricity well nonmetal (nahn MET'I) an element that conducts heat and electricity poorly semiconductor (SEM i kuhn DUK tuhr) an element or compound that conducts electric current better than an insulator does but not as well as a conductor does

#### **How Are Elements Classified?**

As you have learned, elements within a group have similar chemical properties. In addition to being organized into groups, the elements in the 18 groups in the periodic table are further classified into three main categories. These three categories are based on general properties that the elements in the categories have in common, as shown in Figure 4. All elements are either metals, nonmetals, or semiconductors.

#### Elements in each category have similar properties.

As shown in **Figure 4**, most elements are **metals**. Most metals are shiny solids that can be stretched and shaped. They are also good conductors of heat and electricity. Some examples of metals are gold, platinum, and copper.

**Figure 4** shows that all **nonmetals**, except for hydrogen, are found on the right side of the periodic table. Examples of nonmetals include carbon, oxygen, and helium. Nonmetals may be solids, liquids, or gases at room temperature. Solid nonmetals are often dull and brittle. They are poor conductors of heat and electricity. Materials that do not conduct heat or electricity well are sometimes called *insulators*.

Some elements can conduct electricity under certain conditions. These six elements, shown in **Figure 4**, are called **semiconductors**. Semiconductors are also sometimes called *metalloids*. Two common semiconductors are silicon and germanium. The main properties of metals, nonmetals, and semiconductors are summarized in **Figure 5** on the next page.

Reading Check Which category contains the most elements, and which category contains the fewest elements?

Figure 5 Three Categories of Elements

|            | Metals                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          | Nonmetals                                                                                                                                                                                                 | Semiconductors                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
|------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Properties | <ul> <li>Metals are good conductors of electricity.</li> <li>Metals are good conductors of heat.</li> <li>Metals are ductile (easily drawn into thin wires) and malleable (easily shaped or formed).</li> <li>Most metals are shiny.</li> </ul> | <ul> <li>Nonmetals are poor conductors of electricity.</li> <li>Nonmetals are poor conductors of heat.</li> <li>Nonmetals are not malleable or ductile.</li> <li>Most nonmetals are not shiny.</li> </ul> | <ul> <li>Semiconductors share properties with metals and nonmetals.</li> <li>Semiconductors can conduct electricity under certain conditions.</li> <li>Semiconductors are the main components of chips in computers and in other electronic devices.</li> </ul> |
| Examples   | Copper                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          | Carbon                                                                                                                                                                                                    | Tellurium                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |
|            | Lead                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            |                                                                                                                                                                                                           | Silicon                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |

# Section 2 Review

#### **KEY IDEAS**

- **1. Explain** why elements in a group on the periodic table have similar chemical properties.
- 2. Compare the number of valence electrons in an atom of oxygen, O, with the number of valence electrons in an atom of selenium, Se. Are oxygen and selenium in the same period or group?
- Explain why some atoms gain or lose electrons to form ions.
- 4. Describe why lithium and other Group 1 elements usually form positive ions, while fluorine and other Group 17 elements form negative ions.
- **5. List** the three main categories of elements, and give an example of each.

#### **CRITICAL THINKING**

- **6. Making Predictions** Predict which ions cesium forms: Cs<sup>+</sup> ions or Cs<sup>2+</sup> ions.
- **7. Drawing Conclusions** Determine whether elements that fit the following descriptions are more likely to be metals or nonmetals:
  - **a.** a shiny substance used to make flexible bed springs
  - **b.** a yellow powder from underground mines
  - c. a gas that does not react
  - **d.** a conducting material used within flexible wires
  - e. a brittle substance that does not conduct heat
- **8. Making Predictions** Predict the charge of a beryllium ion.


