---
chapter: 3
chapter_title: Exploring the Periodic Table
section: 2
section_title: Families of Elements
---

# **Families of Elements**

#### Key Ideas

- > What does each element family have in common?
- What are the families of metals?
- What are some of the families of nonmetals?
- > What are semiconductors?

#### **Key Terms**

alkali metal alkaline-earth metal transition metal noble gas halogen

#### Why It Matters

The tiny chips in electronic devices contain semiconductors, such as silicon. Semiconductors give chips properties that allow computers to work.

Sometimes, one or more groups in the periodic table are categorized as being members of a unit called a *family*. Consider your own family. Each member is unique, but you all share some features. For example, family members often have a similar appearance, as **Figure 1** shows. Likewise, members of a family in the periodic table have properties in common.

#### **Classifying Elements Further**

You learned earlier that elements can be classified as metals, nonmetals, and semiconductors. Figure 2 shows how elements are further categorized into five families. The elements in a family have the same number of valence electrons. This section explores some of the shared physical and chemical properties of elements in each family.

Figure 2 Element Families

| Group number | Number of valence electrons | Name of family        |
|--------------|-----------------------------|-----------------------|
| Group 1      | 1                           | alkali metals         |
| Group 2      | 2                           | alkaline-earth metals |
| Groups 3-12  | varied                      | transition metals     |
| Group 17     | 7                           | halogens              |
| Group 18     | 8*                          | noble gases           |

\*except helium, which has two electrons

#### Metals

Many elements are classified as metals. All metals conduct heat and electricity. Most metals can also be stretched and shaped into flat sheets, or pulled into wires. > Families of metals include the alkali metals, the alkaline-earth metals, and the transition metals.

#### The alkali metals are very reactive.

Sodium is found in Group 1 of the periodic table, as shown in **Figure 3.** Like other **alkali metals**, it is soft and shiny and reacts violently with water. Alkali metals are often stored in oil to prevent them from reacting with moisture in the air.

An atom of an alkali metal is very reactive because it has one valence electron that can easily be removed to form a positive ion. You have already seen how lithium forms positive ions that have a 1+ charge. Similarly, when its valence electron is removed, a sodium atom forms the positive ion Na<sup>+</sup>.

Because alkali metals such as sodium are very reactive, they are not found in nature as uncombined elements. Instead, they are found combined with other elements in the form of compounds. For example, the salt that you use to season your food is the compound sodium chloride, NaCl. In addition to having similar reactivity, many alkali metals have similar melting points, boiling points, and densities.

Reading Check Why are alkali metals very reactive?

alkali metal (AL kuh uE MET'I) one of the elements of Group 1 of the periodic table

Potassium is an alkali metal. Which property of alkali metals is illustrated here?

# QuickLab @20 min

#### **Elements** in Food

- For 1 day, make a list of the ingredients in all of the foods and drinks that you consume in that day.
- 2 Identify which ingredients on your list are compounds.
- For each compound on your list, try to figure out which elements make up the compound.

Group 2

# Alkaline-earth metals form compounds that are found in limestone and in the human body.

Calcium is in Group 2 of the periodic table, as shown in **Figure 4.** Calcium is an **alkaline-earth metal.** In general, alkaline-earth metals are harder, denser, stronger, and have higher melting points than alkali metals.

Atoms of alkaline-earth metals, such as calcium, have two valence electrons. Alkaline-earth metals are less reactive than alkali metals, but alkaline-earth metals still react to form positive ions. These ions have a 2+ charge. When a calcium atom loses its two valence electrons, the resulting ion, Ca<sup>2+</sup>, has a filled outer energy level. Alkaline-earth metals, such as calcium, combine with other elements to form compounds.

Calcium compounds make up the hard shells of many sea animals. When the animals die, their shells settle to form large deposits that eventually become limestone or marble, both of which are very strong materials used in construction. Coral is one example of a limestone structure. The limestone skeletons of millions of tiny animals combine to form sturdy coral reefs that are the habitats of many fish. Your bones and teeth also get their strength from calcium compounds.

Magnesium, another alkaline-earth metal, is the lightest of all structural metals, or metals used as part of a structure. Magnesium is used to build some airplanes. Magnesium, as  ${\rm Mg^{2+}}$ , activates many of the enzymes that speed up processes in the human body. Two magnesium compounds are commonly used in medicines—milk of magnesia and Epsom salts.

The stalagmites and stalactites in limestone caves contain calcium carbonate deposits.

The halogens combine easily with metals to form salts. Chlorine and other **halogens** belong to Group 17 of the halogen (HAL oh juhn) one of the periodic table, as **Figure 8** shows. The halogens are the most elements of Group 17 of the periodic table reactive nonmetals. Halogens have seven valence electrons. With the addition of a single electron, halogens become stable. For this reason, the halogens combine easily with alkali metals. Halogens can also combine with other metals. Compounds that result from such combinations are called *salts*. You have probably noticed the strong smell of chlorine in swimming pools. Chlorine is widely used to kill bacteria in **Integrating Earth Science** pools, as well as in drinking-water supplies. The chlorine in **Elements in Seawater** Eighty-one most swimming pools is added in the form of the compound elements-including magnesium and calcium hypochlorite, Ca(OCl)<sub>2</sub>. Elemental chlorine is a bromine-have been detected in poisonous yellowish green gas made of pairs of joined chloseawater. To extract an element from a sample of seawater, you must rine atoms. A chlorine atom may gain an electron to form a evaporate some of the water in the negative chloride ion, Cl<sup>-</sup>. The attraction between Na<sup>+</sup> ions sample. Evaporation causes sodium and Cl<sup>-</sup> ions forms sodium chloride, NaCl, which is table salt. chloride (NaCl) to crystallize, which Fluorine, bromine, and iodine are also Group 17 elements. raises the concentration of bromide, magnesium, and other ions in the Fluorine is a poisonous yellowish gas, bromine is a dark red water that remains. The rise in conliquid, and iodine is a dark purple solid. Atoms of each of centration makes the extraction of these elements can also form compounds by gaining an the elements easier. electron to become negative ions. A compound containing the negative fluoride ion, F-, is used in some toothpastes and added to some water supplies to help prevent tooth decay. Adding a compound containing iodine in the form of the negative iodide ion, I-, to table salt makes iodized salt. You need iodine in your diet for proper thyroid gland function. Group 17 Figure 8 The halogens are in the second column Iodine solution can from the right of the periodic table. be used as a skin disinfectant and to Halogens F treat wounds. \_\_\_\_\_ Cl \_\_\_\_ \_\_\_\_\_ \_\_\_\_ Br Chlorine keeps pool water bacteria free for At swimmers to enjoy. 162

# **Reading Web**

Protocol

**1 Protocol** The protocol tells you

the Internet.

what method is used to transfer the

information between computers on

2 Domain The domain specifies the computer or server on the Internet

that contains the Web site. The

domain often tells you the name

of the company, organization, or

3 Path The path specifies the file's

File Name and Extension The file

name identifies the file, and the extension tells you the file type.

If no file name is specified, most

1. Consider the following Web address:

a. What is the server name?

about the Web site?

http://www.smithsonianeducation.org/

**b.** What does the top-level domain tell you

**c.** What kind of file is this? How do you know?

The Periodic Table

servers will look for index.html,

default.html, or home.html.

students/index.html

Chapter 5

**Practice** 

168

location on the server.

institution that owns the Web site.

The World Wide Web is one of the most frequently used parts of the

Path

Address: http://www.nasa.gov/audience/forstudents/9-12/features/index.html

Top-level Domain

Internet. Every page on the Web has a unique address, called a

uniform resource locator (URL). A URL locates a certain file.

Domain

**Addresses** 

Science Skills

Math

Extension

• The protocol for most Web pages is http, which stands for

• The file transfer protocol, or **ftp**, is used for downloading files.

• The last part of the domain, called the top-level domain, is the

• The path consists of directory and subdirectory names that are

• Files with the extension exe are executable files that can install

software, some of which may be unwanted, on your computer.

2. Consider the following Web address:

CollegePlanGuide\_WEB1.pdf

about the Web site?

of file is it?

http://www.science.doe.gov/feature/WFD/

a. What does the top-level domain tell you

**b.** What is the name of this file, and what type

 The extensions html and htm indicate that a Web page is written in HTML, which stands for hypertext markup language.

Documents often have the extensions pdf, doc, or txt.

broadest level of organization. Top-level domains include

File Name

hypertext transfer protocol.

.com (commercial sites)

.net (Internet service providers)

.org (nonprofit organizations)

.edu (educational institutions)
.gov (the U.S. government)

separated by one or more forward slashes (/).

· Image files may have the extensions ipg or gif.

**Technology** 

Graphing

Scientific Methods

