---
chapter: 4
chapter_title: The Structure
section: 1
section_title: Compounds and Molecules
---


#### **Chapter Outline**

#### Compounds and **Molecules**

**Chemical Bonds Chemical Structure How Does Structure Affect Properties?** 

#### **1** Ionic and Covalent **Bonding**

Why Do Chemical Bonds Form? **Ionic Bonds Covalent Bonds Metallic Bonds** Polyatomic Ions

#### **5** Compound Names and Formulas

Naming Ionic Compounds Naming Covalent Compounds **Empirical Formulas** 

#### Organic and Bio**chemical Compounds**

**Organic Compounds Polymers Biochemical Compounds** 

These reading tools can help you learn the material in this chapter. For more information on how to use these and other tools, see **Appendix A.** 

#### **Word Parts**

**Suffixes** The suffix -ic usually changes a noun to an adjective and adds the meaning "pertaining to" or "having characteristics of" to that noun. For example, periodic is an adjective formed from the noun period. It means "pertaining to a period." The suffixes -al and -ar affect a noun in much the same way. When you see a word that uses one of these suffixes, look at the noun at the root of the word. It can help you understand the word's meaning.

**Your Turn** In Section 2, there are three key terms that contain words with the suffix -ic. For each of these words, write the word, the noun the word is related to, and the word's definition. Then, do the same for three more words that you can think of that have the suffixes -ic or -ar. The example below is for the word molecular, which is in the key term molecular formula in Section 3.

| WORD      | RELATED NOUN | DEFINITION OF WORD      |
|-----------|--------------|-------------------------|
| molecular | molecule     | pertaining to molecules |

## **Frequency**

Always, Sometimes, or Never? Many statements include a word that tells you how often that statement is true. Examples include words such as always, sometimes, and never. Words such as some, many, and most tell you about frequency in number. Your Turn As you read this chapter, make a list of statements that contain frequency words. For each statement in your list, underline the word or phrase that tells how frequently the statement is true. An example is given at right.

#### **Frequency Statement:**

A compound is <u>always</u> made of the same elements in the same proportions.

### **FoldNotes**

**Layered Book** FoldNotes are a fun way to help you learn and remember ideas that you encounter as you read.

**Your Turn** As you read the chapter, make a layered book, as described in **Appendix A.** Label the tabs of the layered book with "Chemical Bonding," "Naming Compounds," and "Organic Molecules." Write notes on the appropriate layer as you read the chapter.

# Compounds and Molecules

#### Key Ideas

- > What holds a compound together?
- How can the structure of chemical compounds be shown?
- > What determines the properties of a compound?

#### **Key Terms**

chemical bond chemical structure bond length bond angle

#### Why It **Matters**

Understanding the structure of compounds can help you understand changes in matter, such as in molding clay.

I fyou step on a sharp rock with your bare foot, your foot will hurt. It hurts because rocks are hard substances. Many rocks are made of quartz. Table salt and sugar are both grainy, white solids. But they taste very different. Quartz, salt, and sugar are all compounds that are solids. Their similarities and differences partly come from the way their atoms or ions are joined.

#### **Chemical Bonds**

A compound is made of two or more elements that are chemically combined. The forces that hold atoms or ions together in a compound are called chemical bonds. Figure 1 shows that when a mixture of hydrogen gas and oxygen gas is heated, a fiery chemical reaction takes place. Chemical bonds are broken, and atoms are rearranged. New chemical bonds form water, a compound that has properties very different from the properties of the original gases.

**chemical bond** (KEM i kuhl BAHND) the attractive force that holds atoms or ions together

Figure 1 Placing a lit candle under a balloon that contains a mixture of hydrogen gas and oxygen gas ignites the gases, and water vapor is produced.

Water vapor, H<sub>2</sub>O

#### **Academic Vocabulary**

**structure** (STRUHK chuhr) the arrangement of the parts of a whole

**chemical structure** (KEM i kuhl STRUHK chuhr) the arrangement of atoms in a substance

**bond length** (BAHND LENGKTH) the average distance between the nuclei of two bonded atoms

**bond angle** (BAHND ANG guhl) the angle formed by two bonds to the same atom

**Figure 2** The ball-and-stick model (top) shows the bond angle in a molecule of  $\rm H_2O$ . A picometer (pm) is equal to  $1\times 10^{-12}$  m. The space-filling model of water (bottom) shows that each hydrogen atom takes up less space than the oxygen atom.

#### **Chemical Structure**

Water's chemical formula tells us what atoms make up water, but it does not tell us anything about the way the atoms are connected. The <u>structure</u> of a building is the way the building's parts fit together. Similarly, a compound's **chemical structure** is the way the compound's atoms are bonded to make the compound. Just as the structure of buildings can be represented by blueprints, the structure of chemical compounds can be shown by various models. Different models show different aspects of compounds.

#### Some models represent bond lengths and angles.

In the ball-and-stick model of water shown in **Figure 2**, the atoms are represented by balls. The bonds that hold the atoms together are represented by sticks. Although bonds between atoms are not as rigid as sticks, this model makes it easy to see the bonds and the angles they form in a compound.

Two terms are used to specify the positions of atoms in relation to one another in a compound. **Bond length** is the distance between the nuclei of two bonded atoms. When a compound has three or more atoms, a **bond angle**, the angle formed by two bonds to the same atom, tells which way these atoms point. A ball-and-stick model helps you understand a compound's structure by showing you how the atoms or ions are arranged in the compound. In **Figure 2**, you can see that the way hydrogen and oxygen atoms bond to form water looks more like a boomerang than a straight line.

Structural formulas can also show the structures of compounds. Notice that water's structural formula, shown here, is a lot like water's ball-and-stick model. But in the structural formula, chemical symbols are used to represent the atoms.

#### Space-filling models show the space occupied by atoms.

Another way that chemists represent a water molecule is shown in **Figure 2.** The model below the ball-and-stick model is called a *space-filling model* because it shows the space that the oxygen and hydrogen atoms take up, or fill. A space-filling model shows the relative sizes of atoms in a compound, but not bond lengths.

Reading Check Name an advantage to each model: the balland-stick model and the space-filling model. (See Appendix E for answers to Reading Checks.)

# How Is Clay Molded?

Clay has a layered structure of silicon, oxygen, aluminum, and hydrogen atoms. Artists can mold wet clay into any shape because water molecules hold the clay together loosely, which allows layers of clay to slide over one another. After the artist has gotten the clay into just the right shape, a series of chemical changes have to be made to clay for it to harden. These changes to the chemical structure of the clay molecules make the molded clay into something durable and useful.

When clay dries, the water molecules that had kept the clay soft evaporate and leave the clay dry and crumbly. This is one step in finishing a clay pot, but you wouldn't want a crumbly pot!

The last step in making a clay pot is to fire it in a kiln. Heating the clay causes bonds to form between the molecules of the clay, which makes the pot hard so that you can use it.

- 1. Name two other substances that can be shaped when they are wet and then set when they are dried or heated.
- 2. Suggest what happens to these substances when they dry and set.

#### Bonds can bend, stretch, and rotate without breaking.

Some chemical bonds are stronger than others. But bonds themselves are not really like the sticks in a ball-and-stick model. If the ball-and-stick model was more accurate, bonds would be represented by flexible springs, as Figure 3 shows. Bonds can bend, stretch, and rotate without breaking. The atoms can move back and forth a little, and their nuclei do not always stay the same distance apart. In fact, most reported bond lengths are average distances. Although bonds are not rigid, they hold atoms together tightly.

Figure 3 Chemists often use a solid bar to show a bond between two atoms, but bonds are actually flexible, like springs.

## **How Does Structure Affect Properties?**

Some compounds, such as the quartz found in many rocks, form a large network of bonded atoms. Other compounds,

Every silicon atom in quartz is bonded to four oxygen atoms.

other minerals very high, as the table in Figure 4 shows.

such as table salt, are also large networks but are made of bonded positive and negative ions. Still other compounds, such as water and sugar, are made of many separate molecules. The chemical structure of a compound determines the properties of that compound.

Compounds with network structures are strong solids.

Quartz is sometimes found in the form of beautiful crystals, as Figure 4 shows. Quartz is made of silicon dioxide, SiO<sub>2</sub>.

The bonds that hold these atoms together are very strong. All of the Si–O–Si and O–Si–O bond angles are the same—109.5°.

This arrangement is the same everywhere in silicon dioxide and holds the silicon and oxygen atoms together in a strong, rigid structure.

Never?

The chemical structure of the silicon dioxide determines

Topic: Structures of Substances Code: HK81470

Sodium chloride, NaCl

Chapter 6

(table salt)

180

As you read this section, make a list of frequency statements that describe the structure of various kinds of chemical compounds.

The chemical structure of the silicon dioxide determines the properties of the quartz. Silicon dioxide has a very rigid structure, so rocks that contain quartz are hard and inflexible solids. It takes a lot of energy to break the strong bonds between silicon and oxygen atoms in quartz. The strong bonds also make the melting point and boiling point of quartz and

Reading Check How is the hardness of minerals explained by minerals' chemical structure?

Figure 4 Quartz is made of silicon and oxygen atoms bonded in a strong, rigid structure.

Some Compounds with Network Structures

801

CompoundState (at 25 °C)Melting point (°C)Boiling point (°C)Silicon dioxide, SiO2 (quartz)solid1,7002,230Magnesium fluoride, MgF2solid1,2612,239

solid

The Structure of Matter

1,413

Key Ideas

noble gas.

compound.

Structure

Valence electrons

**Electrical conductivity** 

State at room temperature

Melting and boiling points

> Why do atoms form bonds?

> How do ionic bonds form?

bonds atoms in a real molecule?

> What do atoms joined by covalent bonds share?

Why Do Chemical Bonds Form?

In many of the models that you have seen so far, the bonds that hold atoms together are represented by sticks. But what

Atoms bond when their valence electrons interact. You have learned that atoms with full outermost *s* and *p* orbitals are more stable than atoms with only partly filled outer *s* and *p* orbitals. **> Generally, atoms join to form bonds so that each atom has a stable electron configuration.** When this happens, each atom has an electronic structure similar to that of a

There are two basic kinds of chemical bonding: ionic bonding and covalent bonding. **Figure 1** shows some differ-

ences between ionic and covalent compounds. The way that a

**Covalent compounds** 

solid, liquid, or gas

ISection 2

generally low

molecules

shared

poor

compound bonds determines many of the properties of that

Figure 1 Comparing Ionic and Covalent Compounds

transferred

dissolved)

generally high

**lonic compounds** 

network of bonded ions

good (when melted or

What gives metals their distinctive properties?How are polyatomic ions similar to other ions?

# Ionic and Covalent Bonding

Key **Terms** 

ionic bond

covalent bond

metallic bond

polyatomic ion

Why It **Matters** 

Chemical structure explains matter's proper-

electricity.

ties, such as why met-

als like copper conduct

ww.scilinks.org

183

Topic: Chemical Bonding

Code: HK80264

Ionic and Covalent Bonding

### **Covalent Bonds**

atoms have eight valence electrons.

atoms.

together?

7e

Chlorine atom

covalent bond (koh VAY luhnt

one or more pairs of electrons

Chlorine

gas

7e

Chlorine atom

involved in bonding.

Chapter 6

186

Figure 5 Two chlorine atoms (above) share

electrons equally to form a nonpolar covalent bond. Covalent bonds are often shown as a single line drawn between two atoms. The model at right shows that the two chlorine atoms share two electrons. Dots represent electrons that are not

The Structure of Matter

BAHND) a bond formed when atoms share

Compounds that are made of molecules, such as water and sugar, have **covalent bonds**. **> Atoms joined by covalent** 

bonds share electrons. Compounds that are networks of

bonded atoms, such as silicon dioxide, are also covalently

bonded. Covalent bonds usually form between nonmetal

Covalent compounds can be solids, liquids, or gases. Most covalent compounds that are made of molecules have low melting points—usually below 300 °C. Molecules are free to move when the compound is dissolved or melted. But most of these molecules do not conduct electricity, because they are not charged. Chlorine,  $\mathrm{Cl}_2$ , is a covalent compound that is a gas at room temperature. **Figure 5** shows how two chlorine atoms bond to form a chlorine molecule. Before bonding, each atom has seven electrons in its outermost energy level. If each atom shares one electron with the other atom, then both atoms have a full outermost energy level. That is, both

The structural formula in Figure 5 shows how the chlorine

atoms are connected in the molecule that forms. A single line

drawn between two atoms shows that the atoms share two

Reading Check What holds two covalently bonded atoms

Two of the electrons are in the shared electron cloud.

Chlorine molecule

Each chlorine atom has six

electrons that are not shared.

One covalent bond (two shared electrons)

electrons and are joined by one covalent bond.

#### **Polyatomic Ions**

Until now, we have talked about compounds that have either ionic or covalent bonds. But some compounds have both ionic and covalent bonds. Such compounds are made of **polyatomic ions**, which are groups of covalently bonded atoms that have a positive or negative charge as a group.

A polyatomic ion acts as a single unit in a compound, just as ions that consist of a single atom do.

#### There are many common polyatomic ions.

Many compounds that you use either contain or are made from polyatomic ions. For example, baking soda is a compound that has polyatomic ions. Another name for baking soda is sodium hydrogen carbonate,  $NaHCO_3$ . Hydrogen carbonate,  $HCO_3^-$ , is a polyatomic ion. Sodium carbonate,  $Na_2CO_3$ , is often used to make soaps and other cleaners. It contains the carbonate ion,  $CO_3^{2-}$ . Sodium hydroxide, NaOH, has hydroxide ions,  $OH^-$ , and is also used to make soaps. A few of these polyatomic ions are shown in **Figure 9.** 

Oppositely charged polyatomic ions, like other ions, can bond to form compounds. For example, ammonium nitrate,  $\mathrm{NH_4NO_3}$ , and ammonium sulfate,  $(\mathrm{NH_4})_2\mathrm{SO_4}$ , both contain positively charged ammonium ions,  $\mathrm{NH_4^+}$ . Ammonium nitrate contains one ammonium ion, and ammonium sulfate has two ammonium ions. Nitrate,  $\mathrm{NO_3^-}$ , and sulfate,  $\mathrm{SO_4^{2-}}$ , are both negatively charged polyatomic ions.

#### Parentheses group the atoms of a polyatomic ion.

You might be wondering why the chemical formula for ammonium sulfate is written as  $(NH_4)_2SO_4$  instead of as  $N_2H_8SO_4$ . The parentheses remind us that ammonium,  $NH_4$ , acts like a single ion. Parentheses represent the group that the atoms of the ammonium ion form. The subscript 2 outside the parentheses applies to the whole ion. Parentheses are not needed in compounds such as ammonium nitrate,  $NH_4NO_3$ , because there is only one of each ion.

Always keep in mind that a polyatomic ion's charge applies not only to the last atom in the formula but to the whole ion. For example, the 2– charge of the carbonate ion,  $CO_3^{2-}$ , applies to carbonate,  $CO_3$ , not just the oxygen atom. A polyatomic ion acts as a single unit in a compound.

Reading Check Why are parentheses used in a chemical formula for a compound that contains more than one of a particular polyatomic ion?

metallic bond (muh TAL ik BAHND) a bond formed by the attraction between positively charged metal ions and the electrons around them

polyatomic ion (PAHL ee uh TAHM ik IE ahn) an ion made of two or more

Hydroxide ion, OH

Carbonate ion, CO32

Ammonium ion, NH<sub>4</sub><sup>+</sup>

**Figure 9** The hydroxide ion, OH<sup>-</sup>, carbonate ion, CO<sup>2</sup><sub>3</sub><sup>-</sup>, and ammonium ion, NH<sup>+</sup><sub>4</sub>, are all polyatomic ions.

#### **Integrating Space Science**

**Ions and Molecules in Space** Most of the ions and molecules in space are not the same as the ions and molecules that are found on Earth or in Earth's atmosphere. C<sub>3</sub>H, C<sub>6</sub>H<sub>2</sub>, and HCO<sup>+</sup> have all been found in space. So far, no one has been able to figure out how these unusual molecules and ions form in space.

# Some names of polyatomic anions relate to the oxygen content of the anion.

You may have noticed that many polyatomic anions are made of oxygen. Most of their names end with -ite or -ate. An -ate ending is usually used to name an ion that has more oxygen atoms, while ions that have fewer oxygen atoms associated with the same positive group usually end in -ite. **Figure 10** lists several common polyatomic anions. Notice that hydroxide, OH<sup>-</sup>, is a polyatomic ion that is not named in the way that other ions that contain oxygen are named. Hydroxide and cyanide, CN<sup>-</sup>, are examples of polyatomic anions that have unique names and are not named according to any general rules.

Figure 10 Some Common Polyatomic Anions

| lon name               | lon formula                     |
|------------------------|---------------------------------|
| Acetate ion            | CH <sub>3</sub> CO <sub>2</sub> |
| Carbonate ion          | CO <sub>3</sub> <sup>2-</sup>   |
| Chlorate ion           | CIO3                            |
| Chlorite ion           | CIO <sub>2</sub>                |
| Cyanide ion            | CN-                             |
| Hydrogen carbonate ion | HCO <sub>3</sub>                |
| Hydrogen sulfate ion   | HSO <sub>4</sub>                |
| Hydrogen sulfite ion   | HS0 <sub>3</sub>                |

| lon name         | lon formula                   |
|------------------|-------------------------------|
| Hydroxide ion    | 0H-                           |
| Hypochlorite ion | CIO-                          |
| Nitrate ion      | NO <sub>3</sub>               |
| Nitrite ion      | NO <sub>2</sub>               |
| Phosphate ion    | P0 <sup>3-</sup>              |
| Phosphite ion    | P0 <sup>3-</sup>              |
| Sulfate ion      | S0 <sub>4</sub> <sup>2-</sup> |
| Sulfite ion      | S0 <sub>3</sub> <sup>2-</sup> |

## Section 2 Review

#### **KEY IDEAS**

- Determine if the following compounds are likely to have ionic or covalent bonds.
  - a. magnesium oxide, MgO
  - b. strontium chloride, SrCl<sub>2</sub>
  - c. ozone, O<sub>3</sub>
  - d. methanol, CH<sub>3</sub>OH
- 2. Draw the structural formula for acetylene, C<sub>2</sub>H<sub>2</sub>. The atoms of acetylene bond in the order HCCH. Carbon and hydrogen atoms share two electrons, and each carbon atom must have a total of four bonds. How many electrons do the carbon atoms share?
- Identify which two of the following substances will conduct electric current, and explain why.
  - a. aluminum foil
  - **b.** sugar, C<sub>12</sub>H<sub>22</sub>O<sub>11</sub>, dissolved in water
  - c. potassium hydroxide, KOH, dissolved in water

- **4. Explain** why electrons are shared equally in oxygen, O<sub>2</sub>, but not in carbon monoxide, CO.
- 5. Predict whether a silver coin can conduct electricity. What kind of bonds does silver have?
- Identify which of the bonds in calcium hydroxide, Ca(OH)<sub>2</sub>, are ionic and which are covalent.

#### **CRITICAL THINKING**

- Applying Concepts Does dinitrogen tetroxide, N<sub>2</sub>O<sub>4</sub>, have covalent or ionic bonds? Explain how you reached your conclusion.
- 8. Applying Ideas An atom of the element iodine, I, has much more attraction for electrons than an atom of strontium, Sr, does. What kind of bonds are likely to form between atoms of the two elements?
- Compare and Contrast How are metallic bonds similar to covalent bonds? How are they different?

SECTION 3

