---
chapter: 5
chapter_title: Chemical Equations
section: 2
section_title: Reaction Types
---

# **Reaction Types**

#### Key Ideas

- > How does learning about reaction types help in understanding chemical reactions?
- In which kinds of chemical reactions do the numbers of electrons in atoms change?

#### Key **Terms**

synthesis reaction decomposition reaction combustion reaction single-displacement reaction double-displacement reaction free radical oxidation-reduction reaction

#### Why It Matters

Chemical reactions can create ozone (sometimes where ozone is not healthy) and can destroy ozone (sometimes where ozone is needed).

 $\boldsymbol{1}$ n the last section, you saw what a chemical equation is and what it can tell you. Now that you are familiar with chemical equations, you will learn about the kinds of reactions that can be expressed by a chemical equation.

#### **Classifying Reactions**

Even though there are millions of unique substances and millions of possible reactions, there are only a few general kinds of reactions. You have learned how to follow patterns to name compounds. You also can use patterns to identify kinds of chemical reactions and to predict the products of the chemical reactions. For example, look at the long molecule shown in Figure 1. A certain kind of reaction joins many small molecules to form a much larger molecule. Recognizing this kind of reaction can help you predict the products that the reaction will form.

Figure 1 Polyethene is used to make many kinds of plastics.

#### **Synthesis reactions combine substances.**

Polyethene, shown in **Figure 1**, is a plastic that is often used to make trash bags and soda bottles. It is produced by polymerization, one kind of synthesis reaction. A **synthesis reaction** is a reaction in which multiple substances combine to form a new compound. In polymerization reactions, many small molecules join together in chains to make larger structures called *polymers*. Polyethene is a polymer made up of repeating ethene molecules.

Hydrogen gas reacts with oxygen gas to form water. In a synthesis reaction, at least two reactants join to form a product. Synthesis reactions have the following general form.

In the synthesis reaction below, the metal sodium reacts with chlorine gas to form sodium chloride, or table salt.

$$2\mathrm{Na} + \mathrm{Cl_2} \longrightarrow 2\mathrm{NaCl}$$

Because a synthesis reaction joins substances, the product of such a reaction is a compound that is more complex than the reactants.

#### **Decomposition reactions break substances apart.**

Digestion is a series of reactions that break down complex foods into simple fuels that the body can use. A kind of reaction known as *cracking* is similar to digestion. In cracking, large molecules made of carbon and hydrogen within crude oil are broken down to make gasoline and other products, such as the ones shown in **Figure 2.** Digestion and cracking oil are **decomposition reactions**, reactions in which substances are broken apart. The general form for decomposition reactions is as follows.

The following shows the decomposition of water.

$$2H_2O \longrightarrow 2H_2 + O_2$$

The *electrolysis* of water is a simple decomposition reaction. Water breaks down into hydrogen gas and oxygen gas when there is an electric current in the water.

Reading Check How do decomposition reactions compare with synthesis reactions?

synthesis reaction (SIN thuh sis ree AK shuhn) reaction in which two or more substances combine to form a new compound

# decomposition reaction (DEE kahm puh ZISH uhn ree AK shuhn) a reaction in which a single compound breaks down to form two or more simpler substances

**Figure 2** Crude oil is broken down in decomposition reactions to form plastics, which can be made into many kinds of products.

#### **Academic Vocabulary**

undergo (UHN duhr GOH) to go through

#### Combustion reactions use oxygen as a reactant.

Methane forms carbon dioxide and water during combustion. Oxygen is a reactant in every **combustion reaction**, so at least one product of such a reaction will contain atoms of oxygen. Water is a common product of combustion reactions.

$$CH_4 + 2O_2 \longrightarrow CO_2 + 2H_2O$$

Other carbon compounds, such as those in gasoline and wax, undergo combustion reactions similar to the one above.

When there is not enough oxygen during a combustion reaction, not all fuels are converted completely into carbon dioxide. In that case, some carbon monoxide may form. Carbon monoxide, CO, is a poisonous gas that lowers the ability of the blood to carry oxygen. Carbon monoxide has no color or odor, so you cannot tell when it is present. In some combustion reactions, you can tell if the air supply is limited because the excess carbon is given off as small particles that make a dark, sooty smoke.

of fires are they designed to

put out?

## In single-displacement reactions, elements trade places.

READING

sentences.

**Reading Equations** 

Pick out some of the chemical

equations given in this section,

and practice saying them aloud and writing them in the form of

combustion reaction (kuhm BUHS

chuhn ree AK shuhn) the oxidation

reaction of an organic compound, in

(SING guhl dis PLAYS muhnt ree AK

element or radical in a compound

Figure 3 Aluminum undergoes

a single-displacement reaction

with copper(II) chloride to form copper and aluminum chloride.

Aluminum ion,

 $Al^{3+}$ 

Reaction Types

Section 3

Copper

atom

single-displacement reaction

shuhn) a reaction in which one element or radical takes the place of another

which heat is released

Copper(II) chloride dissolves in water to make a bright blue solution. If you add a piece of aluminum foil to the

material form. The reddish brown clumps are copper metal.

Aluminum replaces copper in the copper(II) chloride to form

colored solution, so the blue color goes away as the amount of

The copper(II) ions, as part of copper(II) chloride, become

 $AX + B \longrightarrow BX + A$ 

 $3CuCl_2 + 2Al \rightarrow 2AlCl_3 + 3Cu$ 

Aluminum atom

Water molecule

Chloride ion,

CI-

solution, the color goes away and clumps of reddish brown

aluminum chloride. Aluminum chloride does not make a

blue copper(II) chloride decreases, as shown in Figure 3.

neutral copper metal. The aluminum metal atoms become aluminum ions. The chloride ions remain the same. Because the atoms of one element appear to move into a compound and atoms of the other element appear to move out, this

reaction is called a single-displacement reaction. Single-

displacement reactions have the following general form.

The equation for the single-displacement reaction

between copper(II) chloride and aluminum is as follows.

less reactive one in a single-displacement reaction.

 $3{\rm CuCl}_2 + 2{\rm Al} \longrightarrow 2{\rm AlCl}_3 + 3{\rm Cu}$  In general, a more reactive element will take the place of a

Reading Check What do all single-displacement reactions

Single-displacement

reaction

have in common?

Copper ion,

Cu2+

#### Why It **Matters**

# Ozone

Ozone is a form of oxygen, but it consists of molecules of  ${\rm O}_3$  rather than  ${\rm O}_2$ , the oxygen we breathe. When the sun's radiation strikes oxygen molecules in the upper atmosphere, some of them break apart into free radicals. The oxygen radicals react with other oxygen molecules to form the ozone layer in the upper atmosphere. Because of its unique properties, ozone is able to absorb much of the sun's radiation and protect Earth's surface. But ozone in the lower atmosphere, created by incomplete combustion, contributes to smog.

EYE ON THE ENVIRONMENT

Altitude (km)

These diagrams show the ozone layer at different times. Certain chemical byproducts, especially chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs), can destroy large amounts of the ozone layer. Such chemicals play a major role in the gradual depletion of the ozone layer that is shown below. CFCs were banned by most countries many years ago, but CFCs can continue to destroy ozone for a long time after they enter the atmosphere.

## YOUR UNDERSTANDING CONCEPTS

1. Explain how ozone is helpful in the upper atmosphere but harmful in the lower atmosphere.

#### Electrons are transferred in redox reactions.

A very common type of reaction involves the transfer of electrons. The formation of rust is an example of such a reaction. In the presence of water, atoms of iron metal, Fe, react with oxygen molecules,  $\rm O_2$ , to form rust,  $\rm Fe_2O_3$ . Each iron atom loses three electrons to form  $\rm Fe^{3+}$  ions, and each oxygen atom gains two electrons to form  $\rm O^{2-}$  ions.

Substances that accept electrons are said to be *reduced*. Substances that give up electrons are said to be *oxidized*. One way to remember which term is which is that the gain of electrons reduces the positive charge on an ion or makes an uncharged atom become a negative ion. Whenever reduction happens, oxidation happens, too. The reverse is also true. Reactions in which one substance loses electrons and another substance gains electrons are called **oxidation-reduction reactions**. These reactions are called *redox reactions* for short.

Some redox reactions do not involve ions. In these reactions, oxidation is a gain of oxygen or a loss of hydrogen, and reduction is the loss of oxygen or the gain of hydrogen. Respiration and combustion are redox reactions because oxygen gas reacts with carbon compounds to form carbon dioxide. Carbon atoms in  $\mathrm{CO}_2$  are oxidized, and oxygen atoms in  $\mathrm{O}_2$  are reduced. Scientists knew about redox reactions before they knew about electrons. They now know that oxidation does not necessarily require oxygen. But they still use the name *oxidation* to describe any reaction in which an atom loses electrons.

oxidation-reduction reaction
(AHKS i DAY shuhn ri DUHK shuhn ree AK
shuhn) any chemical change in which one
species is oxidized (loses electrons) and
another species is reduced (gains\nelectrons); also called redox reaction

#### **Integrating Fine Arts**

Redox Reactions and the Statue of Liberty Metal sculptures often corrode because of redox reactions. The Statue of Liberty, which is covered with 200,000 pounds of copper, was as bright as a new penny when it was first built. However, after more than 100 years, the statue had turned green. The copper reacted with the damp air of New York harbor. More important, oxidation reactions between the damp, salty air and the internal iron supports made the structure dangerously weak. The statue was closed for several years in the 1980s while the supports were cleaned and repaired.

## Section 3 Review

#### **KEY IDEAS**

- **1. Classify** each of the following reactions by type:
  - **a.**  $S_8 + 8O_2 \rightarrow 8SO_2 + energy$
  - **b.**  $6CO_2 + 6H_2O \longrightarrow C_6H_{12}O_6 + 6O_2$
  - c.  $2NaHCO_3 \rightarrow Na_2CO_3 + H_2O + CO_2$
  - **d.**  $Zn + 2HCl \rightarrow ZnCl_2 + H_2$
- List three possible results of a double-displacement reaction.
- 3. Define free radical.
- 4. Identify which element is oxidized and which element is reduced in the following reaction:

$$Zn + CuSO_4 \longrightarrow ZnSO_4 + Cu$$

#### **CRITICAL THINKING**

- 5. Predicting Consequences Explain why charcoal grills or charcoal fires should not be used to heat the inside of a house. (Hint: When it is cold, doors and windows are closed, so there is little fresh air.)
- 6. Compare and Contrast Compare and contrast single-displacement and double-displacement reactions based on the number of reactants. Use the terms compound, atom or element, and ion.
- Analyzing Ideas Describe how a polymer is made, and explain how this process is an example of a synthesis reaction.
- **8. Analyzing Processes** Explain why a reduction must take place whenever oxidation occurs.

