---
chapter: 5
chapter_title: Chemical Equations
section: 3
section_title: Reaction Rates and Equilibrium
---

# Reaction Rates and Equilibrium

#### **Key Ideas**

- > What kinds of things speed up a reaction?
- > What does a catalyst do?
- What happens when a reaction goes backward as well as forward?

#### **Key Terms**

catalyst enzyme substrate chemical equilibrium

#### Why It Matters

By raising some reaction rates in the body, a fever can help a person recover from an illness.

Chemical reactions can occur at different rates, or speeds. Some reactions, such as the explosion of nitroglycerin, shown in Figure 1, are very fast. Other reactions, such as the burning of carbon in charcoal, are much slower. But what happens if you slow down the nitroglycerin reaction to make it safer? What happens if you speed up the reaction by which yeast makes carbon dioxide in order to make bread rise in less time? If you think carefully, you may realize that you already know some ways to change reaction rates. In fact, you may use the factors that affect reaction rates every day.

# **Figure 1** Nitroglycerin, which is used as a rocket fuel, reacts very quickly.

#### **Factors Affecting Reaction Rates**

Think about the following observations:

- A potato slice takes 5 minutes to cook at 200 °C but takes 10 minutes to cook at 100 °C. Therefore, potatoes cook faster at higher temperatures.
- Potato slices take 10 minutes to cook, but whole potatoes take about 30 minutes to cook. Therefore, potatoes cut into smaller pieces cook faster.

These observations have to do with the speed of chemical reactions. In each situation in which the potatoes cooked faster, the contact between particles was greater, so the cooking reaction went faster. This relationship reflects a general principle. Anything that increases contact between particles will increase the rate of a reaction. Factors that affect the rate of a reaction include temperature, surface area, concentration, and pressure.

#### Most reactions go faster at higher temperatures.

Heating food starts the chemical reactions that happen in cooking. Cooking at higher temperatures cooks food faster. Cooling food slows down the chemical reactions that result in spoiling, as shown in **Figure 2.** Particles move faster at higher temperatures. Faster-moving particles collide more often, so there are more chances for the particles to react. Therefore, reactions are faster at higher temperatures.

#### A large surface area speeds up reactions.

When a whole potato is placed in boiling water, only its surface touches the boiling water. The energy from the water has to go all the way through the potato. Cutting a potato into pieces exposes inner parts of the potato. Increasing the *surface area* of a reactant in this way speeds up a reaction.

#### Higher concentrations of reactants react faster.

Imagine building a bonfire. As you read above, a high temperature will get a reaction going. In this case, the energy released in the reaction also keeps the fire going. Small pieces of wood burn faster than thick logs because small pieces have more surface area. Increasing the concentration of the reactants also speeds up a reaction. So, another thing you can do to get a fire blazing is to put plenty of wood on it!

Reading Check Why are reactions at high temperatures faster than at low temperatures?

**Figure 2** Mold will grow on bread stored at room temperature. Bread stored in the freezer for the same length of time will be free of mold when you take the bread out of the freezer.

Bread stored at room temperature

Bread stored in the freezer

## Inquiry Lab

#### Procedure

- Using tongs, hold a paper clip in the hottest part of a burner flame for 30 s. Repeat with a ball of steel wool. Record your observations.
- 2 Label three test tubes "A," "B," and "C." Put 10 mL of vinegar into test tube A, 5 mL of vinegar and 5 mL of water into test tube B, and 2.5 mL of vinegar and 7.5 mL of water into test tube C. Add a piece of magnesium ribbon to each test tube. Record your observations.

# What Affects the Rates of Chemical Reactions?

3 Label three more test tubes "1," "2," and "3." Put 5 mL of vinegar and 5 mL of water into each test tube. Submerge the solution in test tube 1 in a small beaker of ice-cold water. Submerge the solution in test tube 3 in a small beaker of hot water. Add a piece of magnesium ribbon to the test tubes. Record your observations.

#### **Analysis**

 Describe and interpret your results.
 For each step, list the factor(s) that influenced the rate of reaction.

( 30 min

ww.scilinks.org Topic: Catalysts Code: HK80231 catalyst (KAT uh LIST) a substance that changes the rate of a chemical reaction without being consumed or changed significantly enzyme (EN ZIEM) a molecule, either protein or RNA, that acts as a catalyst in biochemical reactions substrate (SUHB STRAYT) the reactant in reactions catalyzed by enzymes Figure 3 An automobile's catalytic converter reduces pollution by helping pollutant molecules react to form harmless substances.

A metal surface, such as platinum or palladium,

Chemical Reactions

can act as a catalyst.

Chapter 7

240

## Reactions are faster at higher pressure.

The *concentration* of a gas is the number of particles in a certain volume. A gas at high pressure has a higher concentration than the same amount of the gas at a low pressure. The reason is that the gas at high pressure has been squeezed into

a smaller space. Gases react faster at higher pressures. When the particles of a gas have less space in which to move, they have more collisions and thus more reactions. Massive, bulky molecules react more slowly.

The mass of the reactant molecules affects the rate of the reaction. According to the kinetic theory of matter, massive molecules move more slowly than less massive molecules at the same temperature. So, for equal numbers of molecules whose masses differ but whose sizes are similar, the molecules

that have more mass collide less often with other molecules.

The size and shape of reactant molecules also affect how fast the molecules react. Large, bulky molecules usually must be in a certain position relative to other molecules to react with the other molecules. Because of their size and their number of branching or bulky parts, large and bulky mol-

ecules may not reach the right position. Thus, these molecules tend not to react as readily as small and simple ones.

Catalysts

Why would one add a substance to a reaction if that sub-

reaction. A substance that changes the rate of a reaction is called a **catalyst**. **A catalyst speeds up or slows down a reaction but is not changed by the reaction.** Substances that slow reactions are also called *inhibitors*. Catalysts are used in various industries. For example, they are used to help make

ammonia, to process crude oil, and to make plastics. Catalysts can be expensive yet profitable to use because they can be cleaned or renewed and reused. Sometimes, the presence of a catalyst is shown by writing the name of the catalyst over the

Most solid catalysts are more effective if they have a large surface area, such as the area of the honeycomb-like metal

stance may not react? One reason is to increase the rate of the

reaction arrow of a chemical equation.

Catalysts work in various ways. Most solid catalysts, such as the ones in car exhaust systems, speed up reactions by providing a surface where the reactants can collect and react.

Then, the reactants can form new bonds to make the products.

surface of the catalytic converter in **Figure 3**.

Figure 7 The Effects of Change on Equilibrium Condition **Effect** Increasing temperature favors the reaction that absorbs Temperature energy. Increasing pressure favors the reaction that produces fewer Pressure molecules of gas. Increasing the concentration of one substance favors the reac-Integrating **Biology** Concentration tion that produces less of that substance. The Nitrogen Cycle All living things need nitrogen, which cycles through Le Châtelier's principle predicts changes in equilibrium. the environment. Nitrogen gas, N2, is Le Châtelier's principle is a general rule that describes how changed to ammonia by bacteria in equilibrium systems respond to change. the soil. Different bacteria in the soil change the ammonia to nitrites and nitrates. Plants need nitrogen in the Le Châtelier's If a change is made to a system in chemical form of nitrates to grow. Animals eat principle equilibrium, the equilibrium shifts to oppose the plants and deposit nitrogen the change until a new equilibrium is reached. compounds back in the soil. When plants or animals die, nitrogen The effects of various changes on an equilibrium system compounds are also returned to the are listed in Figure 7. soil. Additional bacteria change the nitrogen compounds back to nitrogen Ammonia is a chemical building block used to make gas, and the cycle can start again. products such as fertilizers, dyes, plastics, cosmetics, cleaning products, and fire retardants, such as the ones being used in Figure 8. The Haber process, which is used to make ammonia industrially, is shown below. nitrogen and hydrogen  $N_2(gas) + 3H_2(gas) \rightleftharpoons 2NH_2(gas) + energy$ At an ammonia-manufacturing plant, chemists must choose the conditions that favor the highest yield of ammonia gas, NH<sub>3</sub>. In other words, the conditions of the chemical reaction need to be engineered such that the equilibrium favors the production of NH3. Figure 8 Ammonium sulfate and ammonium phosphate are being dropped from the airplane as fire retardants. The red dye that is used for identification fades away after a few days. Ammonium sulfate,  $(NH_4)_2SO_4$ 246 Chapter 7 Chemical Reactions

#### **Forming and Testing a Hypothesis**

Form a hypothesis about how the reaction that you just observed will differ if it is carried out at a different temperature.

#### **Designing Your Experiment**

- With your lab partners, decide how you will test your hypothesis. By completing steps 1–6, you have half of the data needed to answer the question. How will you collect the rest of the data?
- In your lab report, list each step that you will perform in your experiment. Because temperature is the variable that you are testing, the other variables in your experiment should be the same as they were in steps 1–6.

#### **Performing Your Experiment**

Have your teacher approve your plan, and carry out your experiment. Record your results in another similar data table.

#### **Analysis**

- 1. **Describing Events** How did the results of the two reactions differ?
- **2. Interpreting Data** Plot the results of volume over time for both reactions on a graph. Which reaction was more rapid?
- 3. Analyzing Data For each time measurement in each experiment, calculate the amount of gas evolved for each time interval. For each experiment, did the reaction rate change over time? How can you tell?
- **4. Analyzing Data** Calculate the rate of each reaction, expressed as milliliters of gas produced per minute.
- **5. Analyzing Data** Divide the faster rate by the slower rate, and express the reaction rates as a ratio.

#### **Communicating Your Results**

**6. Drawing Conclusions** According to your results, how does changing the temperature affect the rate of a chemical reaction?

#### **Extension**

How would you design an experiment to test the effect of surface area on this reaction? How would your results be expressed?

# Sample Data Table: Measuring Reaction Rate

| Initial gas<br>volume (mL) |                         |
|----------------------------|-------------------------|
| Temperature<br>(°C)        |                         |
| Mass of zinc (g)           |                         |
| Gas volume<br>at 1 min     | DO NOT WRITE<br>IN BOOK |
| Gas volume<br>at 2 min     |                         |
| Gas volume<br>at 3 min     |                         |
| Gas volume<br>at 4 min     |                         |
| Gas volume<br>at 5 min     |                         |

# **Using Mole Ratios**

# Science Skills

**Technology** 

**Scientific Methods** Graphing

# to Calculate Mass

#### Problem

Determine the mass of hydrogen gas, H<sub>2</sub>, and oxygen gas, O2, produced by 4 mol of water, H2O, in the following chemical reaction:

 $2H_2O \longrightarrow 2H_2 + O_2$ 

#### Solution

#### Identify

Write the mole ratio for the balanced equation. Multiply the ratio by the factor that gives the number of moles of H<sub>2</sub>O that are present.

There are 4 mol H<sub>2</sub>O, so multiply each number in the ratio by 2.

| Equation     | 2H <sub>2</sub> 0 | $\rightarrow$ | 2H <sub>2</sub> | + | 02 |
|--------------|-------------------|---------------|-----------------|---|----|
| Mole ratio   | 2                 | -:_           | 2               | : | 1  |
| Amount (mol) | 4                 |               | 4               |   | 2  |

#### Plan

Determine the molar mass of each substance.

Look up the molar mass of each element. There are two hydrogen atoms and one oxygen atom in each molecule of H2O, so the molar mass of  $H_2O$  is  $2 \times 1$  g/mol + 16 g/mol = 18 g/mol. Similarly, the molar mass of H<sub>2</sub> is 2 g/mol, and the molar mass of O<sub>2</sub> is 32 g/mol.

#### Solve

Multiply the number of moles of each substance by the molar mass of that substance.

The total mass of the reactants should match the total mass of the products.

| Equation           | 2H <sub>2</sub> 0 | $\rightarrow$ | 2H <sub>2</sub>        | + | 02                                      |
|--------------------|-------------------|---------------|------------------------|---|-----------------------------------------|
| Mole ratio         | 2                 | :             | 2                      | : | 1                                       |
| Amount (mol)       | 4                 |               | 4                      |   | 2                                       |
| Molar mass (g/mol) | 18                |               | 2                      |   | 32                                      |
| Mass calculation   | 18 g/mol × 4 mol  | =             | 2 g/mol $\times$ 4 mol | + | $32 \text{ g/mol} \times 2 \text{ mol}$ |
| Total mass (g)     | 72                | =             | 8                      | + | 64                                      |

Four moles (72 g) of water,  $H_2O$ , will produce 8 g  $H_2$  and 64 g  $O_2$ .

#### **Practice**

1. Determine the mass of H<sub>2</sub>SO<sub>4</sub> produced when 1 mol H<sub>2</sub>O reacts with 1 mol SO<sub>3</sub> in the following reaction:

 $H_2O + SO_3 \longrightarrow H_2SO_4$ 

2. Determine the mass of ZnSO<sub>4</sub> produced in the following reaction if 2 mol Zn reacts with 2 mol CuSO<sub>4</sub>.

 $Zn + CuSO_4 \longrightarrow ZnSO_4 + Cu$ 

