---
chapter: 6
chapter_title: Acids, Bases, and Salts in the Home
section: 1
section_title: Acids, Bases, and Salts in the Home
---

# Acids, Bases, and Salts in the Home

#### Key Ideas

- > Why are cleaning products added to water?
- What are some household products that contain acids, bases, and salts?

#### **Key Terms**

soap detergent disinfectant bleach antacid

#### Why It **Matters**

Without soaps and detergents, water would not remove grease or oils when you wash dishes or your face.

As you have seen, you do not find acids, bases, and salts only in a laboratory. Many items in your own home, such as soaps, detergents, shampoos, antacids, vitamins, sodas, and juices, are examples of household products that contain acids, bases, and salts.

#### **Cleaning Products**

If you work on an oily bicycle chain or eat potato chips, water alone will not remove the greasy film from your hands.

> Water does not mix with grease or oil. Cleaning products improve water's ability to clean because they help water mix with oily substances.

#### Soaps allow oil and water to mix.

**Soap** improves water's ability to clean because soap can dissolve in both oil and in water. This property of soap allows oil and water to form an emulsion that can be washed away by rinsing. For example, when you are washing your face with soap, as the girl in **Figure 1** is doing, the oil on your face is emulsified by the soapy water. When you rinse your face, the water carries away both the soap and unwanted oil to leave your face clean.

Soaps are salts of sodium or potassium and fatty acids, which have long hydrocarbon chains. The hydrocarbon chains of the soap molecules are nonpolar, so they can mix with oils. The ionic parts of the soap molecules can mix with water. Animal fats or vegetable oils react with sodium hydroxide or potassium hydroxide to make soap. The products of the reaction are soap and an alcohol called *glycerol*.

**soap** (SOHP) a substance that is used as a cleaner and that dissolves in water

**Figure 1** When you wash with soap, you create an emulsion of oil droplets spread throughout water.

#### Why It **Matters**

# How Does Soap Remove Grease?

Soap is able to remove grease and oil because the cations and the negatively charged ends of the chains (-COO<sup>-</sup>) dissolve in water and the hydrocarbon chains dissolve in oil. Soap molecules surround oil droplets and form an emulsion with water. When you wash your hands with soap, you probably rub them together. Rubbing your hands together actually helps clean them. This action lifts most of the emulsion of grease and water into the lather, which can be rinsed into the sink.

 Soap is an ionic compound. Its negative ion is a long hydrocarbon chain with a carboxylate group (-COO<sup>-</sup>) at one end. A positive sodium or potassium ion balances the charge of the negative ion.

SCINKS.

www.scilinks.org

Topic: Surfactants Code: HK81699

2 Soap acts as an emulsifier by surrounding droplets of oil. The hydrocarbon chains are nonpolar, so they mix with the oil.

The charged ends of the soap mix with the polar water. As a result, the droplets of oil surrounded by soap molecules stay suspended in water.

## YOUR UNDERSTANDING CONCEPTS

1. Why do the hydrocarbon ends of the soap molecules mix with oils?

#### **CRITICAL THINKING**

2. Could molecules without an ionic part still work as soap does to remove oils?

#### Detergents have replaced soap in many uses.

As useful as soap is for cleaning, it does not work well in hard water. Hard water contains dissolved Mg<sup>2+</sup>, Ca<sup>2+</sup>, and Fe<sup>3+</sup> ions. These cations combine with the fatty-acid anions of soap to form an insoluble salt called *soap scum*. This soap scum settles out on clothing, dishes, your skin, and your hair. The scum also makes a ring around the bathtub or sink. You can prevent this problem by using detergents instead of soap to wash clothes and dishes. Most shampoos, liquid hand soaps, and body washes contain detergents, not soap.

**Detergents** are salts of sodium, potassium, and sometimes ammonium. Like anions in soaps, the anions in detergents are composed of long hydrocarbon chains that have negatively charged ends. But the charged end of a detergent is a sulfonate group  $(-SO_3^-)$ , not a carboxylate group  $(-CO_2^-)$ . These sulfonate ions do not form insoluble salts with the ions in hard water. The hydrocarbon chains in detergents come from petroleum products rather than animal fats or plant oils.

Soaps and detergents act in the same way. The long hydrocarbon chains are soluble in oil or grease. The charged ends are soluble in water. Water molecules attract the charged sulfonate group in detergent molecules and keep the oil droplet suspended among the water molecules.

Reading Check Why are detergents often used for cleaning instead of soaps?

#### **Integrating Social Studies**

Ancient Soap People have used soap for thousands of years. Ancient Egyptians took baths regularly with soap made from animal fats or vegetable oils and basic solutions of alkali-metal compounds. According to Roman legend, people discovered that the water in the Tiber River near Mount Sapo was good for washing. Mount Sapo was used for elaborate animal-sacrifice rituals, and the combination of animal fat and the basic ash that washed down the mountain made the river soapy.

detergent (dee TUHR juhnt) a watersoluble cleaner that can emulsify dirt and oil

#### **Analysis**

- 1. Does the water wet the surface of the wax paper? How can you tell?
- 2. What happened to the drop of water when you touched it with the toothpick?
- 3. What happened to the drop of water when you touched it with the toothpick that had been dipped in detergent?
- 4. Based on your results, what is one way that detergents help water clean away dirt?

Figure 2 Basic solutions of ammonia can be used to clean away light grease smears, so ammonia solutions are used to clean windows.

#### Many household cleaners contain ammonia.

Ammonia solutions are also good cleaners. Household ammonia is a solution of ammonia gas in water. Ammonia is a weak base because it ionizes only slightly in water to form ammonium ions and hydroxide ions, as shown in the reaction below. The hydroxide ions make the ammonia solution basic.

$$NH_3 + H_2O \rightleftharpoons NH_4^+ + OH^-$$

The concentration of ions is relatively low in an ammonia solution but is enough to remove fingerprints and oily smears. Many ammonia cleaners also contain alcohols, detergents, and other cleaning agents. These cleaners can be used to clean windows, such as those shown in Figure 2.

#### Bleach can eliminate stains.

A disinfectant is a substance that kills viruses and bacteria. Household bleach, a very strong disinfectant, is a basic solution of sodium hypochlorite, NaOCl. As you probably know, bleach can remove colors and stains.

Unlike soaps and detergents, bleach does not remove the substance causing the stain. Instead, bleach changes the substance to a colorless form. When mixed with water, the hypochlorite ion, ClO-, reacts to release an oxygen atom. The oxygen atom reacts with the colored molecule and bleaches it.

If an acid is added to a bleach solution, the acid reacts with the hypochlorite ions and deadly chlorine gas is produced. For this reason, you should never mix bleach with an acid, such as vinegar. Also, ammonia and bleach should not be mixed because toxic chloramine gas, NH2Cl, is formed.

Reading Check What would happen if you were to mix vinegar with bleach?

#### Personal-Care and Food Products

You may not have noticed all of the substances in your home that contain acids and bases. For example, many of the clothes in your closet get their color from acidic dyes. These dyes are sodium salts of organic compounds that contain the sulfonic acid group (-SO<sub>3</sub>H) or the carboxylic acid group (-CO<sub>2</sub>H). If you have ever had an upset stomach because of excess stomach acid, you may have taken an antacid tablet to feel better. The antacid made you feel better because it neutralized the excess stomach acid. > Many healthcare, beauty, and food products in your home, in addition to cleaners, contain acids, bases, or salts.

Figure 3 Stomach acid has about the same concentration of HCl as the solution in the flask in the photograph on the left. When an antacid tablet reacts with the acid, the pH increases to a less acidic level, as shown in the photograph on the right. Why is the solution in one flask pink and the solution in the other flask orange?

#### Many healthcare products are acids or bases.

In the morning before school, you may drink a glass of orange juice that contains vitamin C. Ascorbic acid is the chemical name for vitamin C, which your body needs to grow and repair bone and cartilage. Both sodium hydrogen carbonate and magnesium hydroxide (milk of magnesia) can be used as antacids. **Antacids** are basic substances that you swallow to neutralize stomach acid when you have an upset stomach. The acidic solution shown in **Figure 3** contains an indicator. When the antacid tablet is added to the acidic solution, a neutralization reaction happens. Because there are fewer hydronium ions, the pH of the solution changes. So, the color of the indicator changes from pink to orange.

#### Shampoos are adjusted for an ideal pH.

Shampoos can be made from soap. But if you use a soap-based shampoo and live in an area with hard water, a sticky soap scum may be left on your hair. Most shampoos are made from detergents, so they are able to remove dirt as well as most of the oil from your hair without leaving soap scum, even when they are used with hard water. Shampoo is not meant to remove all of the oil from your hair. Some oil is needed to give your hair shine and to keep it from becoming dry and brittle.

The appearance of your hair is greatly affected by the pH of the shampoo that you use. Hair looks best when it is kept at either a slightly acidic pH or very close to neutral. Hair strands are made of a protein called *keratin*. A shampoo that is too basic can cause strands of hair to swell, which gives them a dull, lifeless appearance. Shampoos are usually pH balanced—that is, they are made to be in a specific pH range. The pH of most shampoos is between 5 and 8. Shampoos that have higher pH values are better at cleaning oil from your hair. Shampoos that have lower pH values protect dry hair.

**disinfectant** (DIS in FEK tuhnt) a chemical substance that kills harmful bacteria or viruses

**bleach** (BLEECH) a chemical compound used to whiten or make lighter, such as hydrogen peroxide or sodium hypochlorite **antacid** (ANT AS id) a weak base that neutralizes stomach acid

#### **Academic Vocabulary**

specific (spuh SIF ik) special to; exact## Inquiry**Lab**

#### What Does an Antacid Do?

- Pour 100 mL of water into one beaker. Add vinegar one drop at a time while stirring. Test the solution with litmus paper after each drop is added. Record the number of drops that you add for the solution to turn blue litmus paper bright red.
- 2 Use the back of a spoon to crush an antacid tablet to a fine powder on a piece of wax paper. Pour 100 mL of water into a second beaker, add the powdered tablet, and stir until a suspension forms.
- 3 Use litmus paper to find out whether the mixture is acidic, basic, or neutral. Record your results.

Now, add vinegar to the antacid mixture. Record the number of drops that you add to cause a reaction with the antacid and turn the blue litmus paper bright red. Compare this solution with the solution that has only vinegar and water. Compare the brand of antacid that you tested with the brands of other groups.

#### **Analysis**

- 1. How does an antacid work to relieve the pain caused by excess stomach acid?
- 2. Of the brands that were tested, which brand worked best? Explain your reasoning.

# READING

#### **Cause-and-Effect Map**

Create a cause-and-effect map that shows why a cut apple turns brown and what happens when lemon juice is added to the apple.

#### Acids can be used as antioxidants.

Some cut fruits, such as the apple shown in Figure 4, slowly turn brown when they are exposed to air. The reason is that certain molecules in the apple react with oxygen to form brown compounds. Why does half of the apple look freshly cut? That part was coated with lemon juice shortly after the apple was cut. The citric acid in lemon juice acts as an antioxidant and prevents oxygen from reacting with the molecules in the apple that form the brown substances. Vitamin C, ascorbic acid, is another example of a natural antioxidant. Antioxidants work in various ways. Citric acid and vitamin C inhibit the enzyme involved in the reaction. Vitamin C also reacts with oxygen molecules before they can react with other molecules.

Figure 4 The right side of the cut apple was coated with lemon juice. Citric acid in the lemon juice kept the surface of the apple looking fresh.

#### Acids, bases, and salts are used in the kitchen.

Acids have many uses in the kitchen. Vinegar or citrus juices are used make acidic marinades that can tenderize meats. The acids cause the protein molecules in the meat to unravel. As a result, the meat becomes more tender.

Milk curdles if you add an acid, such as vinegar, to it. This reaction may seem undesirable, but a similar reaction occurs when yogurt is being made. Bacteria change lactose, a sugar in milk, into lactic acid. The lactic acid changes the shape of the protein casein, causing the milk to become a thick gel.

You use salts other than table salt for baking. Baking soda, or sodium hydrogen carbonate, is a salt that forms carbon dioxide gas at high temperatures. Baking soda is added to cookies so that they rise when baked. Baking powder is also used to make baked goods rise, as **Figure 5** shows. Baking powder contains baking soda and an acidic substance. When mixed in water, these compounds react to release CO<sub>2</sub>, which makes cake batter light and fluffy and helps biscuits rise.

Bases are also used in the kitchen. Many drain cleaners contain sodium hydroxide. This strong base breaks down the grease and other organic materials that cause clogs.

**Figure 5** The carbon dioxide gas released by baking powder during baking causes biscuits to rise.

## Section 3 Review

#### **KEY IDEAS**

- 1. Describe how soap can dissolve in both oil and water. How does soap work with water to remove oily dirt?
- Explain why soap scum might form in hard water that contains Mg<sup>2+</sup> ions when soap is used instead of detergent to wash dishes.
- **3. Explain** how milk of magnesia, an antacid, can reduce acidity in stomach acid.
- 4. List three acidic household substances and three basic household substances. How are the substances most often used?

#### **CRITICAL THINKING**

- 5. Applying Ideas Why does the agitation of a washing machine help a detergent clean your clothes? (Hint: Compare this motion to rubbing your hands together when you wash them.)
- 6. Drawing Conclusions Why it is not necessary for bleach to actually remove the substance that causes a stain?
- 7. Analyzing Methods Crayon companies recommend treating wax stains on clothes by spraying the stains with an oily lubricant, applying dish-washing liquid, and then washing the clothes. Explain why this treatment would remove the stain.

#### What You'll Do

- **Determine** the volume of a basic solution needed to neutralize a given volume of an acidic solution.
- ➤ Analyze the results to compare the volume of basic solution needed to neutralize a given volume of HCl solution with the volume needed to neutralize the same volume of H<sub>2</sub>SO<sub>4</sub> solution.

#### What You'll Need

HCl solution, 0.1 M
H<sub>2</sub>SO<sub>4</sub> solution, 0.1 M
NaOH solution, 0.1 M
marker
phenolphthalein indicator solution
pipets, plastic, disposable (3)
test-tube rack
test tubes (2)

#### Safety

# **Quantities in an Acid-Base Reaction**

Acids and bases neutralize each other to form a salt and water. Phenolphthalein is a good indicator to use in the neutralization of a strong acid by a strong base. Phenolphthalein is a good indicator because it changes color at a pH only slightly higher than neutral. The extra amount of a base that is needed to change the color is usually too small to measure.

#### **Procedure**

#### **Neutralizing HCl with NaOH**

**CAUTION:** Wear an apron or lab coat to protect your clothing when working with chemicals. If a spill gets on your skin or clothing, rinse it off immediately with water for at least 5 min. Wear safety goggles and gloves when handling chemicals. If any substance gets in your eyes, immediately flush your eyes with running water for at least 15 min and notify your instructor. Always use caution when working with chemicals. Always add the base to the acid; never add the acid to the base.

- Use the marker to write "HCI" on the bulb of one pipet. This pipet should be used only for hydrochloric acid solution. Mark a second pipet "NaOH." This pipet should be used only for sodium hydroxide solution.
- 2 Make a data table like the one shown.
- 3 Add 40 drops of 0.1 M HCl solution to a clean test tube at a steady rate. Do not let the tip of the pipet touch the sides of the test tube. Hold the long tube of the pipet with the other hand, if necessary.
- Add 2 drops of phenolphthalein indicator to the test tube. Gently swirl the test tube to mix the liquid in the tube. Be careful not to spill or splash the liquid.
- Note the concentrations of the HCl and NaOH solutions. Predict how many drops of NaOH solution will be required to neutralize the 40 drops of HCl. Record your prediction in the data table.
- 6 Add 25 drops of 0.1 M NaOH solution to the test tube. You will probably see a pink color—the color of phenolphthalein in a basic solution—develop temporarily. Remember this color. Gently swirl the test tube to mix the liquid. The pink color should disappear.

#### **Sample Data Table: Neutralization**

|                                | Number of drops | Drops NaOH needed<br>(predicted) | Drops NaOH needed<br>(measured) |
|--------------------------------|-----------------|----------------------------------|---------------------------------|
| HCI                            |                 | THE IN ROOK                      |                                 |
| H <sub>2</sub> SO <sub>4</sub> | DO NOT V        | VKIIL IN DO                      |                                 |

Add more NaOH solution to the test tube 2 drops at a time, and mix the liquids after each addition. As the pink color starts to disappear more slowly when you mix the liquids, start adding the NaOH solution 1 drop at a time, and mix the solution with each addition. When the mixture remains slightly pink after the addition of a drop and does not change within 10 s, you have reached the end of the neutralization reaction. Record in the data table the total number of drops of NaOH solution that you added.

#### Neutralizing H<sub>2</sub>SO<sub>4</sub> with NaOH

- Use the marker to label a third pipet "H<sub>2</sub>SO<sub>4</sub>." Use this pipet only for sulfuric acid solution.
- Repeat steps 3-7, but start with 40 drops of 0.1 M H<sub>2</sub>SO<sub>4</sub> solution instead of 40 drops of HCl solution. Make and record your prediction as you did in step 5.

#### **Analysis**

- Describing Events Write a complete nonionic chemical equation for the reaction of HCl and NaOH. Then, write the ionic equation for the reaction without spectator ions.
- Describing Events Write a complete nonionic chemical equation for the reaction of H<sub>2</sub>SO<sub>4</sub> and NaOH. Then, write the ionic equation for the reaction without spectator ions.

#### **Communicating Your Results**

- 3. Drawing Conclusions In the neutralization of HCl with NaOH, how close was your predicted number of drops to the actual number of drops of NaOH solution needed? If there is a large difference, explain the reasoning that led to your prediction.
- 4. Drawing Conclusions In the neutralization of H<sub>2</sub>SO<sub>4</sub> with NaOH, how close was your predicted number of drops to the actual number of drops of NaOH solution needed? If there is a large difference, explain the reasoning that led to your prediction.

#### **Extension**

Suppose that someone tries to explain your results by saying that H<sub>2</sub>SO<sub>4</sub> is twice as strong an acid as HCl. How could you explain that this person's reasoning is incorrect?

# Finding Reputable Sources

Anyone can post ideas and information on the Internet. So, you should not believe everything that you read. Below are some tips to help you determine whether or not a Web site is a reputable source.

# Science Skills

#### Technology

Math
Scientific Methods
Graphing

- Examine the Web Address Gather information from the site's Web address (URL).
  - The domain name may tell you if a reputable business, agency, or institution created the site.
  - Is the top-level domain (.com, .org, .edu, or .gov) appropriate for the information that you are seeking?
  - Look for clues that indicate a personal Web site (person's name; an apparent username; or a tilde, "~").
     Be cautious with the information on such sites.
- Domain name Top-level domain

  Address: http://www.collegename.edu
- Evaluate Authority Look for evidence that the author has the authority to present reliable information on the topic.
  - What are the credentials of the author or institution?
  - · Do other cited authors or Web sites seem reputable?
  - · Does the site have few spelling and grammar errors?
- **Evaluate Objectivity** Some companies, organizations, and people may benefit from making you think a particular way.
  - Ask yourself what reason the author of the page may have to want you to believe the information.
  - Does the language on the site have an objective tone?
  - · Are there links to sites that might contain other views?
- Check for Accuracy Be critical of the information on a site.
  - How does the information compare with what you already know?
  - Is the information consistent with that on other Web sites, in books, or other publications on the topic?
  - Are sources that support the information listed?

| Where to look        | Information                                                                                             |
|----------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| About page           | who runs the Web site;<br>mission statement (what the<br>person's or organization's<br>goals are)       |
| Links; related sites | other Web sites that they<br>would like you to visit; may<br>or may not contain relevant<br>information |
| FAQ page             | frequently asked questions                                                                              |
| publications         | often a list of scholarly articles<br>produced by the person or<br>organization                         |

Use the following resources to check Web Site information:

- encyclopedias
- science textbooks
- · science journals and magazines

#### Practice

Suppose that you are researching the toxicity of various household products. For each of the following Web sites, discuss why you think that the source is likely or not likely to be reputable.

- Kenny's eighth-grade science project about household products: www.austinisd.org/ ~kennyken/sciproject
- **2.** Dr. Hazard's toxicity research page: www.med.unc. edu/toxicology/faculty/hazard/toxicity
- **3.** The Web site for a manufacturer of household chemical products: www.cloroxcompany.com
- **4.** The Web site for the U.S. government's Occupational Safety and Health Administration: www.osha.gov

#### **Key Ideas**

#### Section 1 Acids, Bases, and pH

- ➤ Acids Acids taste sour, cause indicators to change color, and conduct electric current. They are also corrosive and can damage materials, including your skin. (p. 293)
- **> Bases** Bases have a bitter taste, and solutions of bases feel slippery. Solutions of bases also conduct electric current, cause indicators to change color, and can damage the skin. (p. 295)
- **> pH** The pH of a solution indicates its concentration of H<sub>3</sub>O<sup>+</sup> ions. In solutions, the concentration of hydronium ions is related to the concentration of hydroxide ions, OH⁻. The pH of a solution also indicates the concentration of OH⁻ ions. (p. 298)

#### Key **Terms**

acid, p. 293 indicator, p. 293 electrolyte, p. 294 base, p. 295 pH, p. 298

#### Section 2 Reactions of Acids with Bases

- **Acid-Base Reactions** A neutralization reaction is the reaction between an acid and a base. (p. 302)
- **Salts** To a chemist, a salt can be almost any combination of cations and anions, except hydroxides and oxides, which are bases. (p. 305)

neutralization reaction, p. 302 salt, p. 303

