---
chapter: 7
chapter_title: What Is Radioactivity?
section: 1
section_title: What Is Radioactivity?
---

# What Is Radioactivity?

#### Key Ideas

- What happens when an element undergoes radioactive decay?
- ➤ How does radiation affect the nucleus of an unstable isotope?
- How do scientists predict when an atom will undergo radioactive decay?

#### Key **Terms**

radioactive decay nuclear radiation alpha particle beta particle gamma ray half-life

#### Why It **Matters**

Nuclear radiation surrounds us on Earth, but scientists did not identify nuclear radiation until a little more than 100 years ago.

Our lives are affected by radioactivity in many ways. Technology using radioactivity has helped humans detect disease, kill cancer cells, generate electricity, and design smoke detectors. However, there are also risks associated with too much nuclear radiation, so we must know where it may exist and how we can counteract it. But first, what exactly is radioactivity?

#### **Nuclear Radiation**

Certain isotopes of many elements undergo a process called radioactive decay. During radioactive decay, the unstable nuclei of these isotopes emit particles, or release energy, to become stable isotopes, as Figure 1 shows. > After radioactive decay, the element changes into a different isotope of the same element or into an entirely different element. Recall that isotopes of an element are atoms that have the same number of protons but different numbers of neutrons in their nuclei. Different elements are distinguished by having different numbers of protons.

The released energy and matter are collectively called **nuclear radiation.** Just as materials that undergo radioactive decay are changed, materials that are bombarded with nuclear radiation are also affected. These effects depend on the type of radiation and on the properties of the materials that nuclear radiation encounters. (Note that the term *radiation* can refer to light or to energy transfer. To avoid confusion, the term *nuclear radiation* will be used to describe radiation associated with nuclear changes.)

radioactive decay (RAY dee oh AK tiv dee KAY) the disintegration of an unstable atomic nucleus into one or more different nuclides

nuclear radiation (NOO klee uhr RAY dee AY shuhn) the particles that are released from the nucleus during radioactive decay

**Figure 1** During radioactive decay, an unstable nucleus emits one or more particles of high-energy electromagnetic radiation.

Figure 2 Types of Nuclear Radiation

| Radiation type | Symbol           | Mass (kg)                 | Charge   | Graphic  |
|----------------|------------------|---------------------------|----------|----------|
| Alpha particle | 4Не<br>2         | 6.646 × 10 <sup>-27</sup> | +2       |          |
| Beta particle  | 0<br>−1          | 9.109 × 10 <sup>-31</sup> | -1, (+1) | 6        |
| Gamma ray      | γ                | none                      | 0        | <b>~</b> |
| Neutron        | 1 <sub>0</sub> n | 1.675 × 10 <sup>-27</sup> | 0        | 0        |

#### There are different types of nuclear radiation.

Essentially, there are four types of nuclear radiation. Nuclear radiation can contain alpha particles, beta particles, gamma rays, or neutrons. Some of the properties of these types are listed in **Figure 2.** When a radioactive nucleus decays, the nuclear radiation leaves the nucleus. This nuclear radiation interacts with nearby matter. This interaction depends in part on the properties of nuclear radiation, such as charge, mass, and energy.

#### Alpha particles consist of protons and neutrons.

Uranium is a radioactive element that naturally occurs as three isotopes. One of its isotopes, uranium-238, undergoes nuclear decay by emitting positively charged particles. Ernest Rutherford, noted for discovering the nucleus, named this radiation alpha ( $\alpha$ ) rays after the first letter of the Greek alphabet. Later, he discovered that alpha rays were actually particles, each made of two protons and two neutrons—the same as helium nuclei. **Alpha particles** are positively charged and more massive than any other type of nuclear radiation.

Alpha particles do not travel far through materials. In fact, they barely pass through a sheet of paper. One factor that limits an alpha particle's ability to pass through matter is that it is massive compared to other subatomic particles. Because alpha particles are charged, they remove electrons from—or ionize—matter as they pass through it. This ionization causes the alpha particle to lose energy and slow further.

Reading Check To which element is an alpha particle related? (See Appendix E for answers to Reading Checks.)

alpha particle (AL fuh PAHRT i kuhl) a positively charged particle that consists of two protons and two neutrons and that is emitted from a nucleus during radioactive decay

beta particle (BAYT uh PAHRT i kuhl) an electron or positron that is emitted from a nucleus during radioactive decay gamma ray (GAM uh RAY) the highenergy photon emitted by a nucleus during

fission and radioactive decay

#### Beta particles are produced from neutron decay.

Some nuclei emit a type of nuclear radiation that travels farther through matter than alpha particles do. This nuclear radiation is composed of beta particles, named after the second Greek letter, beta ( $\beta$ ). Beta particles are often fast-moving electrons but may also be positively charged particles called *positrons*. Positrons have the same mass as electrons.

Negative particles coming from the positively charged nucleus puzzled scientists for years. However, in the 1930s, another discovery helped clear up the mystery. Neutrons, which are not charged, decay to form a proton and an electron. The electron, which has a very small mass, is then ejected at a high speed from the nucleus as a beta particle.

As **Figure 3** shows, beta particles pass through a piece of paper, but most are stopped by 3 mm of aluminum or 10 mm of wood. This greater penetration occurs because beta particles are not as massive as alpha particles. But like alpha particles, beta particles can easily ionize other atoms. As they ionize atoms, beta particles lose energy. This property prevents them from penetrating matter very deeply.

#### Gamma rays are high-energy electromagnetic radiation.

Unlike alpha or beta particles, gamma rays are not made of matter and do not have an electric charge. Instead, **gamma rays**, named for the third Greek letter, *gamma* ( $\gamma$ ), are a form of electromagnetic energy. Like visible light and X rays, gamma rays consist of energy packets called *photons*. Gamma rays, however, have more energy than light or X rays do.

Although gamma rays have no electric charge, they can easily ionize matter. High-energy gamma rays can cause damage in matter. They can penetrate up to 60 cm of aluminum or 7 cm of lead. They are not easily stopped by clothing or most building materials and therefore pose a greater danger to health than either alpha or beta particles do.

#### Neutron radioactivity occurs in an unstable nucleus.

Like alpha and beta radiation, *neutron emission* consists of matter that is emitted from an unstable nucleus. In fact, scientists first discovered the neutron as a result of this emission.

Neutrons have no charge, and therefore they do not ionize matter as alpha and beta particles do. Because neutrons do not use their energy to ionize matter, they are able to travel farther through matter than either alpha or beta particles do. A block of lead about 15 cm thick is required to stop most fast neutrons emitted during radioactive decay.

#### **Analyzing Comparisons**

As you read about the different kinds of nuclear radiation, look for comparisons among them. Create a table of their similarities and differences.

Figure 3 Different kinds of nuclear radiation penetrate different materials. Why must both the thickness and material be specified?

Figure 4 A nucleus that undergoes beta decay has nearly the same atomic mass afterward, but it has one more proton and one less neutron.

#### **Nuclear Decay**

Nuclear decay causes changes in the nucleus of an atom. Anytime that an unstable nucleus emits alpha or beta particles, the number of protons and neutrons changes. An example is radium-226 (an isotope of radium with the mass number 226), which changes to radon-222 by emitting an alpha particle.

Nuclear-decay equations are similar to those used for chemical reactions. The nucleus before decay is like a reactant and is placed on the left side of the equation. The products are placed on the right side.

#### Gamma decay changes the energy of the nucleus.

When an atom undergoes nuclear decay and emits gamma rays, there is no change in the atomic number or the atomic mass of the element. The reason is that the number of protons and neutrons does not change. After gamma decay, the energy content of the nucleus is lower because some of its energy was taken away by the energy in the gamma ray.

#### The atomic number changes during beta decay.

A beta particle is not an atom and does not have an atomic number, which is the number of positive charges in a nucleus. For the sake of convenience, because an electron has a single negative charge, an electron is given an atomic number of -1 in a nuclear-decay equation. Similarly, the electron's mass is so much less than the mass of a proton or a neutron that the electron can be regarded as having a mass number of 0. The beta particle symbol, with the right mass and atomic numbers, is  $_{-1}^{0}$ e.

A beta-decay process occurs when carbon-14 decays to nitrogen-14 by emitting a beta particle, as Figure 4 shows. This process can be written as follows.

$${}^{14}_{6}C \rightarrow {}^{14}_{7}N + {}^{0}_{-1}e$$
  ${}^{14}_{6} = 14 + 0$   ${}^{6}_{6} = 7 + (-1)$ 

In all cases of beta decay, the mass number before and after the decay does not change. The atomic number of the product nucleus, however, increases by 1, so the atom changes to a different element. During carbon-14 beta decay, a neutron changes into a proton. As a result, the positive charge of the nucleus increases by 1, and an atom of nitrogen forms.

Reading Check How do the mass number and the atomic number change during beta decay?

#### Both atomic mass and number change in alpha decay.

In alpha decay, the form of the decay equation is the same except that the symbol for an alpha particle is used. The alpha decay of radium-226 is written as follows.

$$^{226}_{88}$$
Ra  $\rightarrow ^{222}_{86}$ Rn  $+ ^{4}_{2}$ He  $^{226}_{88} = 222 + 4$ 

The mass number of the atom before decay is 226. The mass number equals the sum of the mass numbers of the products, 222 and 4. The atomic numbers follow the same principle. The 88 protons in radium before the nuclear decay equal the 86 protons in the radon-222 nucleus and 2 protons in the alpha particle.

#### **Academic Vocabulary**

principle (PRIN suh puhl) basic law, rule, or belief

#### Math Skills Nuclear Decay

Actinium-217 decays by releasing an alpha particle. Write the equation for this decay process, and determine which element is formed.

|  | 4 | L |  |
|--|---|---|--|
|  | ш |   |  |

Write the equation with the original element on the left side and the products on the right side.

$$^{217}_{89}$$
Ac  $\rightarrow {}^{A}_{Z}X + {}^{4}_{2}$ He

X = unknown productA = unknown massZ = unknown atomic number

#### Plan

Write math equations for the atomic and mass numbers. Rearrange the equations.

$$217 = A + 4 \qquad 89 = Z + 2$$

A = 217 - 4Z = 89 - 2

#### Solve

Solve for the unknown values, and rewrite the equation with all nuclei represented.

$$A = 213$$
  $Z = 87$ 

According to the periodic table, francium has an atomic number of 87. The unknown element is therefore <sup>213</sup>Fr.

$$^{217}_{89}\,\mathrm{Ac} \rightarrow ^{213}_{87}\,\mathrm{Fr} + ^{4}_{2}\,\mathrm{He}$$

#### **Practice**

Complete the following radioactive-decay equations. Identify the isotope X. Indicate whether alpha or beta decay takes place.

1. 
$${}^{12}B \rightarrow {}^{12}C + {}^{A}X$$

3. 
$$^{63}_{28}\text{Ni} \rightarrow ^{A}_{Z}X + ^{0}_{-1}\epsilon$$

**1.** 
$${}^{12}_{5}B \rightarrow {}^{12}_{6}C + {}^{A}_{Z}X$$
 **3.**  ${}^{63}_{28}Ni \rightarrow {}^{A}_{Z}X + {}^{0}_{-1}e$  **2.**  ${}^{225}_{89}Ac \rightarrow {}^{221}_{87}Fr + {}^{A}_{Z}X$  **4.**  ${}^{212}_{83}Bi \rightarrow {}^{A}_{Z}X + {}^{4}_{2}He$ 

**4.** 
$$^{212}_{83}\text{Bi} \rightarrow ^{A}_{Z}X + ^{4}_{2}\text{He}$$

For more practice, visit go.hrw.com and enter keyword HK8MP.

#### Practice **Hint**

- In all nuclear-decay problems, the atomic number of the new atom is the key to identifying the new atom.
- > After determining the new atomic number, use the periodic table to find out the name of the new element.

Why It Matters **Discovering Nuclear Radiation** 

In 1898, Marie Curie and her husband, Pierre, discovered two previously unknown elements, both of which were radioactive. They named one element polonium, after Marie's homeland of

Poland. They named the second element radium, from the Latin word for "ray." In 1903, Marie Curie completed her doctoral thesis and was the first woman in France to receive a doctorate. Later that year, Marie and Pierre Curie were awarded the Nobel Prize in physics for

their studies of radioactive substances. In 1911, Marie also won the Nobel Prize in chemistry for the discovery of these new elements.

Marie Curie used this ionization chamber in her studies of radioactivity. It consists of a tube from which some of the air has been removed. When ionizing radiation-alpha particles, beta particles,

or gamma rays-passes through the chamber, some of the remaining atoms are ionized. Applying a voltage across the ends of the chamber creates a

current in the chamber. The Curies used that current to detect the presence of radioactive substances.

SCI<sub>INKS.</sub> www.scilinks.org

Topic: Radium Code: HK81262

**WRITING IN SCIENCE** 1. Research and write about how the Curies isolated radium. **ONLINE RESEARCH** 2. What other scientists have won Nobel Prizes in physics or chemistry? Have any other scientists won both prizes?

pockets.

332

Marie and Pierre Curie used this glass flask to hold solutions of radioactive elements. Radiation clouded and changed the color of the

glass. Like most scientists

of her day, Marie did not

realize the danger of ionizing radiation and often walked

around with uranium ore in her

1/1

1/2

1/4

1/16 0

Fraction of original element remaining

QuickLab Modeling Decay and Half-Life (20 min 3 Repeat the process until all of the **Procedure** pennies have been set aside. 1 Place 128 pennies in a jar, and place the lid on the jar. Shake the **Analysis** jar, and then pour the pennies onto 1. For each trial, divide the number of a flat work surface. heads-up pennies set aside by the Separate pennies that are heads up total number of pennies used in the from those that are tails up. Count trial. Are these ratios nearly equal to and record the number of heads-up each other? What fraction are they pennies, and set these pennies closest to? aside. Place the tails-up pennies 2. How well does this experiment back in the jar. model radioactive half-life?

Radioactive decay is exponential decay. The definition of *half-life* tells us that after the first half-life of a radioactive sample has passed, half of the sample remains unchanged. After the next half-life, half of the remaining half decays, so only a quarter of the original element remains. Of that quarter, half will decay in the next half-life. Only oneeighth will then remain unchanged. This relationship is called an exponential decay.

A *decay curve* is a graph of the number of radioactive parent nuclei remaining in a sample as a function of time. The relationship between the fraction of carbon-14 versus time is graphed in Figure 6. Notice that the total number of nuclei remains constant and the number of carbon atoms continually decreases over time. As the number of carbon-14 atoms

14C atoms

14N atoms

3

decreases, the number of nitrogen-14 atoms increases. Radioactive Decay of 14C Figure 6 With each successive half-life,

half of the remaining sample decays to

335

form another element. How much of

the original element will remain after four half-lives? go.hrw.com interact online eyword: HK8NUCF6

Half-lives What Is Radioactivity? Section 1

#### Nuclei are held together by a special force.

Neutrons contribute to nuclear stability.

element does not undergo nuclear decay.

become unstable and decay.

are unstable and undergo decay.

that can be found in a stable nucleus?

Strong nuclear force

(acts on protons and neutrons)

nucleus.

READING

**Word Origins** 

Research how the strong nuclear

force was discovered. What is the

**Figure 2** The nucleus is held together by the attractions among protons and neutrons. These forces are greater than the electric repulsion among the

**Nuclear Changes** 

Chapter 10

protons alone.

338

origin of its name? Is there another nuclear force that is "not strong"?

The neutrons and protons are able to exist together in the nuclei of atoms because of the *strong nuclear force*. This force causes protons and neutrons in the nucleus to attract one

Because of the strong nuclear force, neutrons and protons

neutrons have no charge, they do not repel one another or the protons. However, the protons in a nucleus both repel and

attractive forces are stronger than the repulsive forces, and the

another. The attraction is much stronger than the electric repulsion between protons. However, the attraction due to the strong nuclear force occurs over a very short distance, less than  $3 \times 10^{-15}$  m, or about the width of three protons.

in a nucleus attract other protons and neutrons. Because

attract one another, as Figure 2 shows. In stable nuclei, the

Too many neutrons or protons can cause a nucleus to

Although a greater number of neutrons can help hold a nucleus together, there is a limit to how many neutrons that a nucleus can have. Nuclei with too many or too few neutrons

Nuclei with more than 83 protons are always unstable, no matter how many neutrons that the nuclei have. These nuclei will always decay and, in the process, release large amounts of energy and nuclear radiation. Some of this released energy is transferred to the various particles ejected from the nucleus. As a result, the least massive of these particles move very fast. The rest of the energy is emitted in the form of gamma rays. The radioactive decay that takes place results in a more stable

Reading Check What is the maximum number of protons

Electric repulsion

(acts on protons)

Quick**Lab** 

## **Modeling Chain Reactions**

**Procedure** 

To model a fission chain reaction,

dominoes.

3 Continue this process until you

have used all of the dominoes and

you will need a small wooden

have created a triangular shape, as

from the block so that it falls and

hits the second group. Note that

1. Use Newton's first law of motion to

nuclear chain reaction (NOO klee

minimum mass of a fissionable isotope that

provides the number of neutrons needed to

uhr CHAYN ree AK shuhn) a continuous

series of nuclear fission reactions critical mass (KRIT i kuhl MAS) the

sustain a chain reaction

Nuclear Fission and Fusion

341

more dominoes fall with each step.

shown here.

explain your results.

4 Gently push the first domino away

**Analysis** 

building block and a set of

Section 2

Place the building block on a table

or counter. Stand one domino

upright in front of the block and parallel to one of its sides. Stand two more dominoes vertically, par-

allel, and symmetrical to the first

domino.

Chain reactions can be controlled. Energy produced in a controlled chain reaction can be

used to generate electricity. Particles released by the splitting

steam then rotates a turbine to generate electricity. Energy released by the chain reaction changes the atomic energy into thermal energy, which ends up as electrical energy.

The chain-reaction principle is also used in making a nuclear bomb. Two or more masses of uranium-235 are contained in the bomb. These masses are surrounded by a power-

ful chemical explosive. When the explosive is detonated, all of the uranium is pushed together to create a *critical mass*. The critical mass refers to the minimum amount of a substance

that can undergo a fission reaction and can also sustain a chain reaction. If the amount of fissionable substance is less than the critical mass, a chain reaction will not continue.

Fortunately, the concentration of uranium-235 in nature is too low to start a chain reaction naturally. Almost all of the escaping neutrons are absorbed by the more common and more

stable isotope uranium-238. In nuclear power plants, control rods are used to regulate fission by slowing the chain reaction. In nuclear bombs,

reactions are not controlled, and almost pure pieces of the element uranium-235 or plutonium of a precise mass and shape must be brought together and held together with great force. These conditions are not present in a nuclear reactor.

of the atom strike other uranium atoms and split them. The particles that are given off split still other atoms. A chain reaction is begun, which gives off energy that is used to heat water. The superheated water then transfers energy into a heat exchanger filled with water that is used to make steam. The

**Key Ideas** 

> Where are we exposed to radiation?

background radiation (BAK GROWND

RAY dee AY shuhn) the nuclear radiation that

arises naturally from cosmic rays and from

human tissue as 1 roentgen of high-voltage

around us.

Chapter 10

**Figure 1** Sources of background radiation, both natural and artificial, are all

radioactive isotopes in the soil and air

rem (REM) the quantity of ionizing radiation that does as much damage to

X rays does

344

What are some beneficial uses of nuclear radiation?

What factors determine the risks of nuclear radiation?

▶ How is the energy produced by nuclear fission used?

# Nuclear Radiation Today

nuclear radiation.

Where Is Radiation?

at least 20% of our everyday exposure.

**Key Terms** 

background

radiation

radioactive tracer

ou may be surprised to learn that you are exposed to some form of nuclear radiation every day. Some forms of nuclear radiation are beneficial. Others present some risks. This section will discuss both the benefits and the possible risks of

Nuclear radiation is all around you. The form of nuclear radiation that arises naturally is called **background radiation**.

> We are continually exposed to radiation from natural

sources, such as the sun, soil, rocks, and plants. More than

80% of the radiation that we are exposed to comes from natu-

ral sources, such as those shown in **Figure 1.** The living tissues

of most organisms are adapted to survive these low levels of

computer monitors, smoke detectors, and X rays, account for

natural nuclear radiation. Human-made sources, such as

rem

Why It Matters

Radioactive tracer

elements are used in

medical diagnostic pro-

emission tomography.

cedures such as positron

# **How Do PET Scans Work?**

REAL WORLD

Positron emission tomography (PET) is a medical procedure that can be used to study how a patient's body is functioning. PET scans can help doctors detect medical problems, such as cancer and heart disease. These scans can show changes in biological processes earlier than changes in anatomy are visible by using other procedures, such as CAT scans and MRIs.

- Patients receiving a PET scan are injected with a radioactive tracer that is attached to a natural body compound, such as glucose.
- 2 After 30 to 45 minutes, patients are taken to the PET scanner. They must lie very still while the detectors record the emission of energy from the injected radioactive materials.
- 3 Because living tissues use glucose for energy, different colors on the computer screen correspond to the different levels of function in the body.

Researchers use PET imaging to understand brain function, both for disease detection and for research. In these scans, a research subject's brain was scanned with different sets of stimuli. Scientists can use this information to learn which areas of the brain are used to process different sensations.

#### www.scilinks.org

Topic: Radioactive Tracers Code: HK81257

#### YOUR CRIT

#### **CRITICAL THINKING**

 Name some advantages and disadvantages of PET scans for medical diagnosis.

#### WRITING IN SCIENCE

2. Research other medical diagnostic techniques. How do they compare to PET scans?

#### **Word Origins**

What are the origins of the words *ionization* and *dosimeter*? Do these words have root words from other languages? If so, what are the meanings of those root words?

**Figure 7** A dosimeter contains a piece of film that detects radiation in the environment. Dosimeters help indicate exposure to ionizing radiation.

#### **Risks from Nuclear Radiation**

Although nuclear radiation has many benefits, there are also risks, because nuclear radiation interacts with living tissue. Alpha and beta particles, as well as gamma rays and X rays, can change the number of electrons in the molecules of living materials. This process is known as *ionization*. Ionized molecules may form substances that are harmful to life.

The risk of damage from nuclear radiation depends on both the type and the amount of radiation exposure. The effects of low levels of nuclear radiation on living cells are so small that they may not be detected. However, studies have shown a relationship between exposure to high levels of nuclear radiation and cancer. Cancers associated with high-dose exposure include leukemia and breast, lung, and stomach cancers.

The ability to penetrate matter differs among different types of nuclear radiation. A layer of clothing or an inch of air can stop alpha particles. Beta particles are lighter and faster than alpha particles. Beta particles can penetrate a fraction of an inch in solids and liquids and can travel several feet in air. Several feet of material may be required to protect you from high-energy gamma rays.

## High levels of nuclear radiation can cause radiation sickness.

Radiation sickness is an illness that results from excessive exposure to nuclear radiation. This sickness may occur from a single massive exposure, such as a nuclear explosion, or repeated exposures to very high nuclear radiation levels. Individuals who work with nuclear radiation must protect themselves with shields and special clothing. People who work in radioactive areas wear *dosimeters*, devices for measuring the amount of nuclear radiation exposure. Figure 7 shows one example of a dosimeter.

#### High concentrations of radon gas can be hazardous.

Colorless and inert, *radon gas* is produced by the radioactive decay of the uranium-238 present in soil and rock. Radon gas emits alpha and beta particles and gamma rays. Tests have shown a correlation between lung cancer and high levels of exposure to radon gas, especially for smokers. Some areas have higher radon levels than others do. Tests for radon gas in buildings are widely available.

High concentrations of radon-222 in homes or offices can be eliminated by sealing cracks in foundations or by installing vents that draw air out of the building.

**Figure 8** Nuclear reactors such as this one are used over much of the world to generate electricity. **What are some advantages to nuclear power?** 

#### **Nuclear Power**

Nuclear reactors, such as the one shown in Figure 8, are used in dozens of countries to generate electricity. > Energy produced from fission is used to provide electrical energy to millions of homes and businesses. There are many advantages to this source of energy. There are also disadvantages.

#### Nuclear fission has both advantages and disadvantages.

One advantage of nuclear fission is that it does not produce gaseous pollutants. Also, there is much more energy in the known uranium reserves than in the known reserves of coal and oil.

In nuclear fission reactors, energy is produced when a controlled fission reaction is triggered in uranium-235. However, the products of fission reactions are often radioactive isotopes. Therefore, serious safety concerns must be addressed. Radioactive products of fission must be handled carefully so that they do not escape into the environment and release nuclear radiation.

Another safety <u>issue</u> involves the safe operation of the nuclear reactors in which the controlled fission reaction is carried out. A nuclear reactor must be equipped with many safety features. The reactor requires considerable shielding and must meet very strict safety requirements. Thus, nuclear power plants are expensive to build.

Reading Check How do energy reserves for uranium compare to those of coal and oil?

#### **Academic Vocabulary**

issue (ISH oo) a point of debate

**Figure 9** Storage facilities for nuclear waste must be designed to contain radioactive materials safely for thousands of years.

#### Nuclear waste must be safely stored.

Besides the expense that occurs during the life of a nuclear power plant is the expense of storing radioactive materials, such as the fuel rods used in the reactors. After their use, they must be placed in safe facilities that are well shielded, as **Figure 9** shows. These precautions are necessary to keep nuclear radiation from leaking out and harming living things. The facilities must also keep nuclear radiation from contacting groundwater.

Ideal places for such facilities are sparsely populated areas that have little water on the surface or underground. These areas must also be free from earthquakes.

#### Nuclear fusion releases large quantities of energy.

The sun uses the nuclear fusion of hydrogen atoms; this fusion results in larger helium atoms. Solar energy can be captured by solar panels or other means to provide energy for homes and businesses. Another option that holds some promise as an energy source is controlled nuclear fusion.

Some scientists estimate that 1 kg of hydrogen in a fusion reactor could release as much energy as 16 million kg of burning coal. The fusion reaction itself releases very little waste or pollution.

Because fusion requires that the electric repulsion between protons be overcome, these reactions are difficult to produce in the laboratory. However, scientists are conducting many experiments in the United States, Japan, and Europe to learn how people can exploit fusion to create a clean source of power that uses fuels extracted from ordinary water.

#### Integrating Space Science

**Element Factory** All heavy elements, from cobalt to uranium, are made when massive stars explode. The pressure that is produced in the explosion causes nearby nuclei to fuse, in some cases, more than once.

The explosion carries the newly created elements into space. These elements later become parts of new stars and planets. The elements of Earth are believed to have formed in the outer layers of an exploding star.

# **Nuclear fusion also has advantages and disadvantages.**The most attractive feature of fusion is that the fuel for

fusion is abundant. Hydrogen is the most common element in

the universe, and it is plentiful in many compounds on Earth, such as water. Earth's oceans could provide enough hydrogen

to meet current world energy demands for millions of years.

Practical fusion-based power, illustrated by the concept drawing in **Figure 10**, is far from being a reality. Fusion reactions have some drawbacks. They can produce fast neutrons, a highly energetic and potentially

Research on nuclear fusion is still in its infancy. Successful experiments are just beginning. Who can say what the future may hold? Perhaps future scientists will find the answers to the nagging questions that plague the government today concerning

Section 3 Review

1. List three sources of background radiation.

radiation under normal circumstances.

and what sets off the alarm.

of using nuclear energy.

2. Identify three activities that add to background

**3. Describe** how smoke detectors use alpha particles

Explain how radioactive tracers help locate tumors.

5. **Describe** three factors that contribute to how much

6. Identify some of the advantages and disadvantages

damage is done to living tissue by radiation.

the perfect fuel for U.S. citizens.

dangerous form of nuclear radiation.
Because shielding material in the reactor would have to be replaced periodically, the expense of operating a fusion power plant would still be high. Lithium can be used to slow down these neutrons, but lithium is chemically reactive and rare, so its use is

impractical.

**KEY IDEAS** 

Figure 10 The ITER experimental

built in France.

CRITICAL THINKING

Section 3

risks of radiation therapy?

and treatment of disease.

ings for radon gas levels important?

7. Compare and Contrast What are the benefits and

**8. Inferring Conclusions** Explain why it is important

9. Drawing Conclusions Why is the testing of build-

10. Making Predictions Suppose that uranium-238

could undergo fission as easily as uranium-235

does. Predict how that situation would change the

Nuclear Radiation Today

351

advantages and disadvantages of fission reactors.

to use low levels of nuclear radiation for detection

nuclear fusion research reactor will be

# **Counting Nuclear Decay**

#### **Problem**

In a sample of francium-223, 93.75% of the sample has undergone radioactive decay. Francium-223 has a half-life of 22 min.

- a. What fraction of francium-223 remains in the sample?
- **b.** How many half-lives did it take for the sample to decay?
- c. How long did the sample take to decay?

# Science Skills

#### **Technology**

Scientific Methods Graphing

#### Solution

#### Identify

List all given and unknown values.

#### Given:

percentage of sample decayed = 93.75% half-life = 22 min

#### **Unknown:**

- a. fraction of sample remaining
- **b.** n = number of half-lives
- c. time of decay

#### Plan

- **a.** Subtract the fraction decayed from 1 to find the amount of sample remaining.
- b. Determine how many multiples of 1/2 are in the fraction of sample remaining.
- **c.** Multiply the number of half-lives by the half-life to find the time of decay.
- **a.** fraction of sample remaining = 1 fraction of sample decayed =

$$1 - \frac{percentage\ of\ sample\ decayed}{100}$$

- **b.**  $\left(\frac{1}{2}\right)^n = fraction of sample remaining$
- **c.** time of decay =  $n \times half$ -life

#### Solve

Substitute the given values into the equation, calculate the unknown quantities, and solve.

**a.** fraction of sample remaining =

$$1 - \frac{93.75}{100} = 1 - 0.9375 = 0.0625 = \frac{1}{16}$$

**b.** 
$$\frac{1}{16} = \left(\frac{1}{2}\right) \times \left(\frac{1}{2}\right) \times \left(\frac{1}{2}\right) \times \left(\frac{1}{2}\right) = \left(\frac{1}{2}\right)^4$$

number of half-lives =  $n = 4$ 

**c.**  $time\ of\ decay = 4 \times 22\ min = 88\ min$ 

#### **Practice**

- 1. What fraction of iodine-132 remains if 87.5% has undergone radioactive decay?
- 2. How many half-lives are required for the sample to decay?
- **3.** Iodine-132 has a half-life of 2.3 h. How long does the sample take to decay completely?

