---
chapter: 8
chapter_title: Measuring Motion
section: 1
section_title: Measuring Motion
---

# **Measuring Motion**

#### Key Ideas

- How is a frame of reference used to describe motion?
- What is the difference between speed and velocity?
- What do you need to know to find the speed of an object?
- > How can you study speed by using graphs?

#### **Key Terms**

motion frame of reference displacement speed velocity

#### Why It Matters

Rescue workers can use the last-known velocity of a lost airplane to determine where to look for survivors.

We are surrounded by moving things. From a car moving in a straight line to a satellite traveling in a circle around Earth, objects move in many ways. In everyday life, motion is so common that it seems very simple. But describing motion scientifically calls for careful use of definitions.

#### **Observing Motion**

You may think that the **motion** of an object is easy to detect—just look at the object. But you really must observe the object in relation to other objects that stay in place, called *reference points*. A **frame of reference** is used to describe the motion of an object relative to these reference points. The trees in the background in **Figure 1** can be used as a frame of reference to describe the motion of the snowboarder.

• When an object changes position with respect to a frame of reference, the object is in motion. You can describe the direction of an object's motion with a reference direction, such as north, south, east, west, up, or down.

motion-(MOH SHUHN)-an object's change in position relative to a reference point

frame of reference–(FRAYM UHV REF uhr uhns)–a system for specifying the precise location of objects in space and

**Figure 1** In this multiple-exposure photograph, the trees can provide a frame of reference.

#### Distance measures the path taken.

In addition to knowing direction, you need to know how far an object moves if you want to correctly describe its motion. To measure distance, you measure the length of the path that the object took. For example, if you start at your home and drift around your neighborhood, changing directions a few times, a string that follows your path would be as long as the distance you traveled.

#### Displacement is the change of an object's position.

Suppose that a student runs around the outside of a soccer field, as shown in **Figure 2.** The distance traveled is found by measuring the whole path, shown by the yellow line. The line from the starting point directly to the ending point, shown as a black arrow, is called the **displacement**.

Distance measures how far an object moves along a path. Displacement measures how far it is between the starting and ending points. Displacement is often shorter than the distance traveled, unless the motion is all in a straight line.

The direction of a displacement must also be given. The distance between your home and school may be 12 blocks, but that information does not tell whether you are going toward or away from school. Displacement must always indicate the direction, such as 12 blocks *toward school*.

**What is the difference between distance and displacement?** (See Appendix E for answers to Reading Checks.)

1.4 m/s

Person walking

#### **Speed and Velocity**

You know from experience that some objects move faster than others. **Speed** describes how fast an object moves. The speed for some everyday objects is shown in **Figure 3**, and the distance versus time of the objects is graphed in **Figure 4**.

Sometimes, you may need to know the direction in which an object is moving. In 1997, a 200 kg lion escaped from a zoo in Florida. A helicopter crew was able to guide searchers on the ground by reporting the lion's **velocity**, which is its speed and direction of motion. The lion's velocity may have been reported as 4.5 m/s to the north or 2.0 km/h toward the highway. Without knowing the direction of the lion's motion, searchers could not have predicted its position. **> Speed tells us how fast an object moves, and velocity tells us both the speed and the direction that the object moves.** 

#### Velocity is described relative to a reference point.

The direction of motion can be described in different ways, such as east, west, south, or north of a fixed point. Or it can be an angle from a fixed line. Direction is described as positive or negative along the line of motion. So, if a body is moving in one direction, it has positive velocity. If it is moving in the opposite direction, it has negative velocity. By convention, up and right are usually positive, and left and down are negative.

#### Combined velocities determine the resultant velocity.

If you are riding in a bus traveling east at  $15 \, \text{m/s}$ , you and all the other passengers are traveling at a velocity of  $15 \, \text{m/s}$  east relative to the street. But suppose that you stand up and walk at  $1 \, \text{m/s}$  toward the back of the bus. Are you still moving at the same velocity as the bus relative to the street? No, but your new velocity can be easily calculated. Your new velocity is equal to  $15 \, \text{m/s}$  east  $+ (-1 \, \text{m/s}$  east)  $= 14 \, \text{m/s}$  east.

**displacement** (dis PLAYS muhnt) the change in position of an object

**speed** (SPEED) the distance traveled divided by the time interval during which the motion occurred

**velocity** (vuh LAHS uh tee) the speed of an object in a particular direction

**Figure 4** When an object's motion is graphed by plotting distance on the *y*-axis and time on the *x*-axis, the slope of the graph is speed.

# Quick**Lab**

#### Measuring Speed

#### (A) 10 min

#### **Procedure**

- 1 Stand up 25 dominoes in a straight line. Try to keep equal spacing between the dominoes.
- 2 Use a **meterstick** to measure the total length of your row of dominoes, and record the length.
- 3 Tip over the first domino. Use a stopwatch to time how long it takes for all of the dominoes to fall.

Repeat steps 1–3 several times using smaller and larger distances between the dominoes.

#### **Analysis**

- To calculate the average speed for each trial, divide the total distance by the time that it takes the dominoes to fall.
- 2. How did the spacing between dominoes affect the average speed? Is this the result that you expected?

**Figure 5** A sledder's average speed can be determined by timing the rider on a set course.

#### **Calculating Speed**

Speed describes distance traveled over a specified time.

To calculate speed, you must measure two quantities: the distance traveled and the time it took to travel that distance. The SI unit for speed is meters per second (m/s).

When an object covers equal distances in equal amounts of time, it is moving at a *constant speed*. For example, if a train has a constant speed of 67 m/s, the train moves a length of 67 m every second.

#### Average speed is calculated as distance divided by time.

Most objects do not move at a constant speed but change speed from one instant to another. One way to make it easier to describe the motion of an object is to use *average speed*. Average speed is the distance traveled by an object divided by the time the object takes to travel that distance.

Suppose that a sledder, such as one shown in **Figure 5**, moves 132 m in 18 s. By putting the time and distance into the formula above, you can calculate her average speed.

$$v = \frac{d}{t} = \frac{132 \text{ m}}{18 \text{ s}} = 7.3 \text{ m/s}$$

The sledder's average speed over the length is 7.3 m/s. But she probably did not travel at this speed for the whole race. Her pace may have been slower near the start of the race and faster near the bottom of the hill.

Reading Check How do you calculate average speed?

#### Instantaneous speed is the speed at a given time.

instantaneous speed of the car.

Math Skills Velocity

Identify

Plan

speed.

Solve

**Practice** 

List the given and the

a. Perform any necessary conversions.

b. Write the equation for

Insert the known values into

110 m toward the shore in 72 s.

member to include direction.

from third base to first base in 1.7 s.

the equation, and solve.

unknown values.

glacier's velocity in m/s. Remember to include direction.

Given:

Unknown:

time,  $t = 1 \, \text{day}$ 

 $speed = \frac{distance}{time} = \frac{d}{t}$ 

 $v = \frac{d}{t} = \frac{89 \text{ m}}{8.64 \times 10^4 \text{ s}}$ 

1. Find the velocity in meters per second of a swimmer who swims

2. Find the velocity in meters per second of a baseball thrown 38 m

3. Calculate the displacement in meters that a cyclist would travel in

For more practice, visit **go.hrw.com** and enter the keyword **HK8MP**.

5.00 h at an average velocity of 12.0 km/h to the southwest. Re-

(For velocity, include direction.)

 $\nu = 1.0 \times 10^{-3}$  m/s down the valley

You could find the sledder's speed at any given point in time by measuring the distance traveled in a shorter time interval. The smaller the time interval, the more accurate the

interval (IN tuhr vuhl) a space between objects, units, points, or states measurement of speed will be. Speed measured in an infinitely small time interval is called instantaneous speed.

Although it is impossible to measure an infinitely small time

Academic Vocabulary

interval, some devices measure speed over very small time

intervals. Practically speaking, a car's speedometer gives the

Metal stakes are sometimes placed in a glacier to help measure the glacier's movement. For several days in 1936, Alaska's Black Rapids

glacier surged as swiftly as 89 m per day down the valley. Find the

distance, d = 89 m down the valley

*velocity, v = ?* (m/s and direction)

To find the velocity in meters per

second, convert the time to seconds.  $t = 1 \text{ day} = 24 \text{ h} \times \frac{60 \text{ min}}{1 \text{ h}} \times \frac{60 \text{ s}}{1 \text{ min}}$ Practice **Hint**  $t = 86,400 \text{ s} = 8.64 \times 10^4 \text{ s}$ > When a problem requires you to calculate

> velocity, you can use the speed equation. Remember to specify direction. > Problem 3: The speed equation can be rearranged to isolate distance on the left

side of the equation. First, multiply both sides by t.

placement.

Section 1

 $v = \frac{d}{t}$  $v \times t = \frac{d}{t} \times t$ 

d = vtBe sure to rearrange the equation before you substitute numbers for v, d, or t. > You can use the distance form of the equa-

tion to find displacement. Remember to specify direction when you solve for dis-

Measuring Motion

369

