---
chapter: 9
chapter_title: Conservation of Energy
section: 1
section_title: Conservation of Energy
---

# **Conservation of Energy**

Key Ideas Why It **Matters Key Terms** How does energy change? efficiency Hydroelectric power plants use conservation > What is the law of conservation of energy? of energy to generate > How much of the work done by a machine is actually the electricity that you useful work? use every day. magine that you are sitting in the front car of a roller coaster, such as the one shown in Figure 1. A conveyor belt pulls the car slowly up the first hill. When you reach the crest of the hill, you are barely moving. Then, you go over the edge and start to

race down the hill. You speed faster and faster until you reach the bottom of the hill. The wheels are roaring along the track. You continue to move up, down, and around through smaller humps, twists, and turns. Finally, you climb another hill almost as big as the first, drop down again, and coast to the end of the ride.

But whatever forms the energy takes during a transformation,

Energy Transformations

In the course of a roller coaster ride, energy changes form many times. You may not have noticed the conveyor belt at the beginning, but in terms of energy input, the conveyor belt is the most important part of the ride. All of the energy required

Figure 1 The Kingda Ka roller coaster, located in New Jersey, takes riders up 139 m and allows them to drop at near free-fall acceleration. What forms of energy propel a roller coaster car?

for the whole ride comes from work done by the conveyor belt as it lifts the cars and the passengers up the first hill.

The energy from that initial work is stored as gravitational potential energy at the top of the first hill. After that point, most of the energy goes through a series of transformations,

or changes, turning into kinetic energy and then back into potential energy.

A small quantity of the stored energy is transferred to the wheels as heat and to the air as vibrations that make a roaring sound. Energy readily changes from one form to another.

the total amount of energy always remains the same.

Section 4 Conservation of Energy

When fireworks

explode, potential

energy is converted to many other forms of

energy: kinetic energy,

sound, light, and heat

Midway through its

path, the rocket has

both potential and

kinetic energy.

Figure 4 When it is

on the ground, the

fireworks rocket has

chemical potential

energy.

456

#### The Law of Conservation of Energy

In our study of machines, we saw that the work done on a machine is equal to the work that it can do. Similarly, in our

study of the roller coaster, we found that the energy present at the beginning of the ride is present throughout the ride and at the end of the ride even though the energy changes form. These simple observations are based on one of the most

important principles in science—the law of conservation of

In other words, the total amount of energy in the universe never changes, although energy may change from one form to another. Energy never disappears, but it does change form.

Energy cannot be created from nothing. Imagine a girl jumping on a trampoline. If her second bounce is higher than her first bounce, we must conclude that she added energy to her bounce by doing work with her legs. Whenever the total energy in a system increases, the increase must be due to

Mechanical energy can change to nonmechanical energy

through chemical reactions, air resistance, and other factors.

rounding environment. When fireworks explode in a burst of

heat, light, and sound, as shown in Figure 4, the conversion of

Energy can be transferred as work or as heat. For example, when you lift a ball, you give the ball potential energy. When you sand wood, the wood gets warm and energy is transferred as heat. > For any system, the net change in energy equals the energy transferred as work and as heat. When no energy is transferred as heat or as work, mechanical energy is con-

served. This form of the law of energy conservation is called

Energy has many forms and can be found almost every-

where. Accounting for all of the energy in a given case can be

complicated. To make studying a case easier, scientists often limit their view to a small area or a small number of objects.

Some of the energy in a system may leak out into the sur-

Thermodynamics describes energy conservation.

Energy cannot be created or destroyed.

energy. Here is the law in its simplest form.

Energy does not appear or disappear.

energy that enters the system.

the first law of thermodynamics.

These boundaries define a system.

energy is spectacular!

Law of conservation

of energy

#### **Efficiency of Machines**

If you use a pulley to raise a sail on a sailboat like the one in **Figure 5**, you have to do work against the force of friction in the pulley. You also must lift the added weight of the rope and the hook connected to the sail. As a result, only some of the energy that you transfer to the pulley is available to raise the sail. **)** Only a portion of the work done by any machine is useful work— that is, work that the machine is designed or intended to do.

#### Not all of the work done by a machine is useful work.

Because of friction and other factors, only some of the work done by a machine is applied to the task at hand. The machine also does some incidental work that does not serve any intended purpose. There is a difference between the total work and the useful work done by a machine.

Even though all of the work done on a machine has some effect on the output work that the machine does, the output work may not be in the form that you expect. For example, because of friction, some of the energy applied to the pulley to lift the sail is transferred as heat that warms the pulley. This warming is not a desired effect. The amount of useful work might decrease slightly more if the pulley squeaks, because some energy is "lost" as it dissipates into forces that vibrate the pulley and the air to produce the squeaking sound.

Reading Check What are some of the ways that energy is "lost" in machines?

#### Efficiency is the ratio of useful work out to work in.

The **efficiency** of a machine is a measure of how much useful work a machine can do. Efficiency is defined as the ratio of useful work output to total work input.

Efficiency is usually expressed as a percentage. To change an answer found by using the efficiency equation into a percentage, multiply the answer by 100 and then add the percent sign (%).

A machine that is 100% efficient would produce exactly as much useful work as the work done on the machine. Because every machine has some friction, no machine is 100% efficient. The useful work output of a machine never equals—and certainly cannot exceed—the work input.

Figure 5 The pulleys on a sailboat, like all machines, are less than 100% efficient.

efficiency (e FISH uhn see) a quantity, usually expressed as a percentage, that measures the ratio of useful work output to work input

Figure 6 Theoretically, a perpetual motion machine could keep going forever without any energy loss or energy input. Why is a perpetual motion machine impossible?

#### Practice **Hint**

- The efficiency equation can be rearranged to isolate any of the variables on the left.
- Problem 2: Rearrange the efficiency equation to isolate work input on the left side.
- Problem 3: Rearrange the efficiency equation to isolate useful work output.
- When using these rearranged forms to solve the problems, you will have to plug in values for efficiency. When doing so, do not use a percentage. Instead, convert the percentage to a decimal by dropping the percent sign and dividing by 100.

#### Perpetual motion machines are impossible.

A machine designed to keep going forever without any input of energy is shown in **Figure 6.** Such a theoretical machine is called a *perpetual motion machine*. Many clever inventors have devoted a lot of time and effort to designing such a machine. But a perpetual motion machine could work only in the absence of friction and air resistance, a condition not found in this world.

#### Math Skills Efficiency

A sailor uses a rope and an old, squeaky pulley to raise a sail that weighs 140 N. He finds that he must do 180 J of work on the rope to raise the sail by 1 m. (He does 140 J of work on the sail.) What is the efficiency of the pulley? Express your answer as a percentage.

| List the given and unknown values.                    | Given:  work input = 180 J \nuseful work output = 140 J  Unknown: \nefficiency = ? %                                                                                                |
|-------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Plan Write the equation for efficiency.               | $efficiency = \frac{useful\ work\ output}{work\ input}$                                                                                                                             |
| Insert the known values into the equation, and solve. | efficiency = $\frac{140 \text{ J}}{180 \text{ J}}$ = 0.78<br>To express this number as a percentage, multiply by 100 and add the percent sign (%).<br>efficiency = 0.78 × 100 = 78% |

#### **Practice**

- 1. Alice and Jim calculate that they must do 1,800 J of work to push a piano up a ramp. However, because they must also overcome friction, they actually must do 2,400 J of work. What is the efficiency of the ramp?
- 2. It takes 1,200 J of work to lift a car high enough to change a tire. How much work must be done by the person operating the jack if the jack is 25% efficient?
- **3.** A windmill has an efficiency of 37.5%. If a gust of wind does 125 J of work on the blades of the windmill, how much output work can the windmill do as a result of the gust?

For more practice, visit go.hrw.com and enter keyword HK8MP.

#### Machines need energy input.

Because energy always leaks out of a system, a machine such as the solar car in **Figure 7** needs at least a small amount of energy input to keep going. But new technologies, from magnetic trains to high-speed microprocessors, reduce the amount of energy that leaks from systems so that energy can be used as efficiently as possible.

Figure 7 This solar electric car converts solar energy to electrical energy and converts electrical energy to mechanical energy and work.

## Section 4 Review

#### **KEY IDEAS**

- List three cases in which potential energy becomes kinetic energy and three cases in which kinetic energy becomes potential energy.
- State the law of conservation of energy in your own words. Give an example of a situation that you have either encountered or know about in which the law of conservation of energy is demonstrated.
- 3. Explain why machines are never 100% efficient.
- Describe the rise and fall of a thrown basketball by using the concepts of kinetic energy and potential energy.

#### **CRITICAL THINKING**

5. Creative Thinking Using what you have learned about energy transformations, explain why the driver of a car has to continuously apply pressure to the gas pedal in order to keep the car cruising at a steady speed, even on a flat road. Does this situation violate the law of conservation of energy? Explain.

**6. Applying Knowledge** Use the concepts of kinetic energy and potential energy to describe the motion of a child on a swing. Why does the child need a push from time to time?

#### Math Skills

- 7. When you do 100 J of work on the handle of a bicycle pump, the pump does 40 J of work pushing the air into the tire. What is the efficiency of the pump?
- **8.** A river does 6,500 J of work on a water wheel every second. The wheel's efficiency is 12%.
  - a. How much work in joules can the axle of the wheel do?
  - **b.** What is the power output of the wheel in 1 s?
- **9.** John is using a pulley to lift the sail on his sailboat. The sail weighs 150 N, and he must lift it 4.0 m.
  - a. How much work must be done on the sail?
  - **b.** If the pulley is 50% efficient, how much work must John do on the rope to lift the sail?

#### **Objectives**

- Measure the height, distance traveled, and time interval for a ball rolling down a ramp.
- ➤ Calculate the ball's potential energy at the top of the ramp and its kinetic energy at the bottom of the ramp.
- ➤ Analyze the results to find the relationship between potential energy and kinetic energy.

#### **Materials**

balance
board, at least 90 cm (3 ft) long
box
golf ball, racquet ball, or handball
masking tape
meterstick
stack of books, at least 45 cm high
stopwatch

# **Energy of a Rolling Ball**

Raised objects have gravitational potential energy. Moving objects have kinetic energy. In this lab, you will find out how these two kinds of energy are related in a system in which a ball rolls down a ramp.

#### **Procedure**

#### **Preparing for Your Experiment**

 On a blank sheet of paper, prepare a table like the one shown below.

#### Sample Data Table: Potential Energy and Kinetic Energy

|                                         | Height 1 | Height 2 | Height 3 |
|-----------------------------------------|----------|----------|----------|
| Mass of ball (kg)                       |          |          |          |
| Length of ramp (m)                      |          |          |          |
| Height of ramp (m)                      |          |          |          |
| Time ball traveled, first trial (s)     |          |          |          |
| Time ball traveled, second trial (s)    |          |          |          |
| Time ball traveled, third trial (s)     |          | WRITE IN | BOOK     |
| Average time ball traveled (s)          | DO NOT   | WKIILI   |          |
| Average speed of ball (m/s)             |          |          |          |
| Final speed of ball (m/s)               |          |          |          |
| Final kinetic energy of ball (J)        |          |          |          |
| Initial potential energy of ball (J)    |          |          |          |
| Initial <i>PE</i> – Final <i>KE</i> (J) |          |          |          |

- Measure the mass of the ball, and record it in your table.
- Open Place a strip of masking tape across the board close to one end, and measure the distance from the tape to the opposite end of the board. Record this distance in the row labeled "Length of ramp."
- Make a catch box by cutting out one side of a box.
- Make a stack of books approximately 15 cm high. Build a ramp like the one shown in the photograph by setting the taped end of the board on top of the books. Place the other end of the board in the catch box. Measure the vertical height of the ramp at the tape, and record this value in your table in the row labeled "Height of ramp."

1. Write one sentence using the word work in the

scientific sense, and write another sentence

2. For each of the following, state whether the

a. a stone in a stretched slingshot

c. water above a hydroelectric dam

3. How is energy related to work, force, and

4. List several examples that show how electrical

energy and light energy are useful to you.

5. Name three simple machines that make up a

UNDERSTANDING KEY IDEAS

7. The quantity that measures how much a

machine multiplies force is called

a. mechanical advantage.

is defined as force times distance.

c. Work

d. Potential energy

Work and Energy

can opener, which is a compound machine.

system contains primarily kinetic energy or

using the word in a nonscientific sense. Explain

the difference in the meaning of work in the two

8. The unit that represents 1 J of work done each

b. a dart being shot from a spring-loaded gun

is determined by both mass and velocity.

c. Potential energy

d. Kinetic energy

c. the string of a bow being pulled back

11. Energy that does not involve the large-scale

motion or the position of objects in a system is

Which of the following phrases describes a situation in which potential energy is not

changed into kinetic energy? **a.** an apple falling from a tree

**d.** a creek flowing downstream

c. watt.

**d.** mechanical advantage.

second is the

a. power.

10.

a. Work

**b.** Power

called

a. potential energy.b. mechanical energy.

d. conserved energy.

c. redistribute work.

**12.** A machine cannot

less than one

b. multiplies force.

c. increases output force.

conservation of energy?

c. nonmechanical energy.

a. change the direction of a force.b. multiply or increase a force.

a. increases speed and distance.

d. reduces distance and speed.

a. No machine is 100% efficient.

d. increase the total amount of work done.13. A machine that has a mechanical advantage of

14. Which of these statements describes the law of

**b.** Energy is neither created nor destroyed.

c. The energy resources of Earth are limited.

**d.** The energy of a system is always decreasing.

b. newton.

READING

sentences.

**USING KEY TERMS** 

potential energy:

power?

a. Power

**b.** Energy

b. leverage.

c. efficiency.

**466** Chapter 13

d. power.

**b.** a speeding race car

These reading tools can help you learn the material in this chapter. For more information on how to use these and other tools, see Appendix A.

## **Word Families**

**Prefixes and Suffixes** What do you think of when you hear the word thermal? You may think of the word thermos or perhaps the phrase thermal blanket. The noun thermal means "a current of warm air." What do these words or phrases have in common? They are related to heat or temperature. These words or phrases have a common root, thermo-, which means "heat" or "hot."

Your Turn On a separate sheet of paper, start a table like the one below. As you read the chapter, find words that contain the root thermo- and make entries in the table for them.

| WORD        | ROOT    | PREFIX OR<br>SUFFIX | DEFINITION                               |
|-------------|---------|---------------------|------------------------------------------|
| thermometer | thermo- | -meter              | a device that<br>measures<br>temperature |

## Comparisons

**Comparison Table** When you are comparing two things, you can describe how they are similar or how they are different.

- · Often, a comparison describes one thing as greater than or less than another thing in some way.
- A single comparative word can also be used to make comparisons. Comparative words use the suffixes -er or -est.
- Comparative phrases may use the words more or less.

Your Turn As you read this chapter, fill out a comparison table like the one below. Each row of the table should list the things being compared and the word or phrase that indicates a comparison.

| FIRSTTHING   | COMPARISON<br>WORD OR PHRASE | SECOND<br>THING |
|--------------|------------------------------|-----------------|
| air near the | hotter than                  | air near        |
| equator      |                              | the poles       |

## **Graphic Organizers**

Flow Chart Graphic Organizers are drawings that you can make to help you organize the concepts that you learn. A flow chart is a Graphic Organizer that shows the order and direction of the steps in a process.

Your Turn As you read Section 3, create your own flow chart for the cycle of an internal-combustion engine. At right is an example to get you started.

