---
chapter: 9
chapter_title: Conservation of Energy
section: 2
section_title: Temperature
---

# **Temperature**

#### Key Ideas

- > What does temperature have to do with energy?
- > What three temperature scales are commonly used?
- > What makes things feel hot or cold?

#### Key **Terms**

temperature thermometer absolute zero heat

#### Why It **Matters**

We control temperatures for many reasons, such as keeping ourselves comfortable.

When you touch the hood of an automobile, you sense how hot or cold the car is. In everyday life, we sometimes call this feeling of hot or cold the *temperature* of an object. However, the words *hot* and *cold* serve only as rough indicators of temperature. Temperature itself is closely related to energy.

#### Temperature and Energy

People use **temperature** readings, such as the ones shown in **Figure 1**, to make many kinds of decisions every day. You check the temperature of the air outside to decide what to wear. To find out if a roasting turkey is done, a cook checks its temperature. You take your temperature to find out if you are ill. In all these cases, what is actually being measured is kinetic energy. **>** The temperature of a substance is proportional to the average kinetic energy of the substance's particles.

**temperature** (TEM puhr uh chuhr) a measure of how hot (or cold) something is; specifically, a measure of the average kinetic energy of the particles in an object

**Figure 1** Many decisions are made based on temperature.

#### Quick Lab

#### Sensing Hot and Cold

#### **Procedure**

- Gather small pieces of the following materials: metal, wood, plastic foam, rock, plastic, and cardboard. Allow the materials to sit untouched on a table for a few minutes.
- 2 For each of the materials, put the palms of your hands on the material until you can tell how cool or warm it feels. List the materials in order from coolest to warmest.
- Place a thermometer strip on the surface of each material. Record the temperature of each material.

#### **Analysis**

- 1. Which material felt the warmest to your hands? Which material had the highest temperature?
- 2. Why do you think some materials felt warmer than others? Was your hand a good thermometer? Explain.

#### All particles have kinetic energy.

All particles in a substance are constantly moving. Like all moving objects, each particle has kinetic energy. Temperature is related to the kinetic energy of particles.

As the average kinetic energy of the particles in an object increases, the object's temperature increases. The particles in a hot car hood move faster than particles in a cool car hood because the hot particles have more kinetic energy. But how do we measure the temperature of an object? It is impossible to find the kinetic energy of every particle in an object and calculate their average energy. Actually, there is a very simple way to measure temperature directly.

Reading Check How is the temperature of a substance related to the kinetic energy of the particles in the substance? (See Appendix E for answers to Reading Checks.)

#### Common thermometers rely on expansion.

To measure temperature, we use a simple physical property of substances: Most substances expand when their temperatures increase. **Thermometers,** such as the one shown in **Figure 2,** use the expansion of liquids such as mercury or colored alcohol to measure temperature. These liquids expand as their temperature increases and contract as their temperature falls.

As the temperature rises, the particles in the liquid inside a thermometer gain kinetic energy and move faster. With this increased motion, the particles in the liquid move farther apart. So, the liquid expands and rises up the narrow tube.

#### thermometer

(thuhr MAHM uht uhr) an instrument that measures and indicates temperature

**Figure 2** This thermometer uses the expansion of a liquid, colored alcohol in this case, to indicate changes in temperature.

#### Thermostats rely on the expansion of different metals.

Most metals also expand when heated and contract when cooled. This turns out to be a useful property in making thermometers that are part of household appliances.

The thermometer inside a thermostat is based on the expansion of metal, as shown in **Figure 3.** The thermometer contains a coil made from two different metal strips pressed together. Both strips expand and contract at different rates as the temperature changes. As the temperature falls, the coil unwinds and moves the pointer to the new temperature mark. As the temperature rises, the coil winds up and moves the pointer in the opposite direction.

#### **Temperature Scales**

Suppose you hear someone say that it is 37 degrees outside. How do you know whether to wear a sweater or a T-shirt? On the Fahrenheit temperature scale, 37 degrees is just above freezing. But on the Celsius scale, this temperature would mean that it is very hot outside! The Fahrenheit, Celsius, and Kelvin temperature scales are commonly used for different applications in different parts of the world.

# The Fahrenheit and Celsius scales are two different temperature scales.

The units on the Fahrenheit scale are called *degrees Fahrenheit* (°F). On the Fahrenheit scale, water freezes at 32 °F and boils at 212 °F.

Most countries other than the United States use the Celsius scale. This scale is also the one that is widely used in science. The Celsius scale gives a value of 0 °C to the freezing point of water and a value of 100 °C to the boiling point of water at standard atmospheric pressure. The difference between these two points is divided into 100 equal parts, called *degrees Celsius* (°C).

One degree Celsius is equal to 1.8 degrees Fahrenheit. Also, the temperature at which water freezes differs for the two scales by 32 degrees. To convert from one scale to the other, use one of the following formulas.

**Figure 3** Inside a thermostat, a coil made of two different metal strips expands and contracts in response to the temperature.

# READING TOOLBOX

#### **Word Families**

The word thermostat begins with the root therm-. What do you think the root stat- means, based on what the root therm- means and what a thermostat does?

Fahrenheit temperature = 
$$(1.8 \times \text{Celsius temperature}) + 32.0$$
  
 $T_{\text{F}} = 1.8T_{\text{C}} + 32.0$   
Celsius temperature = 
$$\frac{\text{Fahrenheit temperature} - 32.0}{\text{Fahrenheit temperature}}$$

Celsius temperature = 
$$\frac{\text{Fahrenheit temperature } - 35}{1.8}$$
$$T_{\text{C}} = \frac{T_{\text{F}} - 32.0}{1.8}$$

Figure 4 Temperature can be converted from one of the three temperature scales—Fahrenheit, Celsius, and Kelvin—to another. How does the Kelvin scale differ from the other two temperature scales?

absolute zero (AB suh LOOT ZIR oh) the temperature at which molecular energy is at a minimum (0 K on the Kelvin scale or –273.15 °C on the Celsius scale)

# The Kelvin scale is based on absolute zero.

You have probably heard of negative temperatures, such as those reported on very cold winter days in the northern United States and Canada. Remember that temperature is a measure of the average kinetic energy of the particles in an object. Even far below 0 °C, these particles are still moving, so they have some kinetic energy. But how low can the temperature fall? The theoretically lowest temperature is -273.15 °C and is called absolute zero. At a temperature of absolute zero, the kinetic energy of an object would be zero.

Some recent experiments have reached temperatures that are very close to absolute zero. Matter behaves very differently at these extremely low temperatures.

Absolute zero can never be reached, however, because particles never completely stop moving.

Absolute zero is the basis for the Kelvin temperature scale. On this scale, 0 kelvin, or 0 K, is absolute zero. Because the theoretically lowest temperature is given a value of zero, there are no negative temperature values on the Kelvin scale. The Kelvin scale is used in many fields of science, especially those involving low temperatures. The three temperature scales are compared in **Figure 4**.

One kelvin is equal to one degree on the Celsius scale. The only difference between the two scales is the way that *zero* is defined. To approximate any temperature in kelvins, just add 273 to the same temperature in degrees Celsius. The equation for this conversion is given below.