---
chapter: 1
chapter_title: The Science of Physics
section: 1
section_title: SECTION 1
---

# CHAPTER 1 Instruction and Intervention Support

## The Science of Physics

## **Core Instruction**

#### **Chapter Resources**

- The Teacher's Edition wrap has extensive teaching support for every lesson, including Misconception Alerts, Teach from Visuals, Demonstrations, Teaching Tips, Differentiated Instruction, and Problem Solving.
- Several additional presentation tools are available online for every chapter, including Animated Physics features, Interactive Whiteboard activities, and Visual Concepts.

| Section | Instruction                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            | Labs and Demonstrations Go Online for Materials Lists and Solutions Lists.                                                                                                                                                                            |
|---------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| 1.1     | <ul> <li>Textbook: What Is Physics?</li> <li>Animated Physics: Scientific Models</li> <li>Visual Concepts: Physics • Scientific Method •         Models • Hypothesis • Controlled Experiment and Variable</li> <li>Teaching Visuals: Physics and Automobiles • Physics Analysis of a Thrown Basketball • Galileo's Thought Experiment • and more</li> <li>PowerPresentations</li> </ul>                | <ul> <li>Demonstration: Galileo's Hypothesis</li> <li>Lab: The Circumference-Diameter Ratio of a Circle</li> <li>Lab: Black Box (Open Inquiry)</li> </ul>                                                                                             |
| 1.2     | ■ Textbook: Measurements in Experiments  ② Visual Concepts: SI (Système International d'Unités)  • Dimensions • Accuracy and Precision • and more  ② Teaching Visuals: Estimation in Measurement • SI Standards • Metric Prefixes for Powers of Ten • Determining Whether Zeroes are Significant Figures • Rules for Rounding in Calculations  ② PowerPresentations                                    | <ul> <li>Demonstrations: Measurements • Standard Units • Accuracy and Precision • Significant Figures</li> <li>QuickLab: Metric Prefixes</li> <li>Lab: Physics and Measurement (Core Skill)</li> <li>Lab: Time and Measurement (Probeware)</li> </ul> |
| 1.3     | <ul> <li>Textbook: The Language of Physics</li> <li>Visual Concepts: Shapes of Graphs and<br/>Mathematical Relationships • Evaluating Physics<br/>Expressions • Abbreviations for Variables and Units</li> <li>Teaching Visuals: Data from Dropped-Ball<br/>Experiment • Graph of Data from Dropped-Ball<br/>Experiment • Abbreviations for Variables and Units</li> <li>PowerPresentations</li> </ul> | ■ Lab: Graph Matching (Probeware)                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |

## **2 Support and Intervention 3 Specialized Support**

- **■ Study Guide**
- **Concept Maps**
- **■ Scientific Reasoning Skill Builder**
- **Interactive Demos**
- **Sample Problem Set I**
- **Sample Problem Set II**

- **■ Chapter Summary Audio Files**
- **■ Differentiated Instruction:** Inclusion, Below-Level, and English Learners (TE wrap)

## **Enrichment and Challenge**

- **■ Differentiated Instruction:** Pre-AP (TE wrap)
- **■ Why It Matters (STEM):** The Mars Climate Orbiter Mission (SE)

| Assessment |  |  |
|------------|--|--|
|            |  |  |

- **■ Section Quizzes**
- **■ Chapter Tests A and B**
- **■ Alternative Assessment (SE)**
- **Online Assessment and Remediation**
- **■ ExamView Banks**

| Where do I find it?                  | PRINT | DVD | ONLINE |
|--------------------------------------|-------|-----|--------|
| Animated Physics                     | ■     | ■   | ■<br>■ |
| Demonstrations (TE wrap)<br>Labs     |       | ■   | ■      |
| PowerPresentations                   |       | ■   | ■      |
| QuickLabs                            | ■     | ■   | ■      |
| Teaching Visuals                     |       | ■   | ■      |
| Textbook                             | ■     | ■   | ■      |
| Visual Concepts                      |       | ■   | ■      |
| Interactive Demos                    |       | ■   | ■      |
| Concept Maps                         |       | ■   | ■      |
| Sample Problem Set I                 |       | ■   | ■      |
| Sample Problem Set II                |       | ■   | ■      |
| Scientific Reasoning Skill Builder   |       | ■   | ■      |
| Study Guide                          |       | ■   | ■      |
| Chapter Summary Audio Files          |       | ■   | ■      |
| Differentiated Instruction (TE wrap) | ■     |     |        |

## **CHAPTER 1**

## **Chapter Overview**

Section 1 describes the nature of physics and its related fields and activities, introduces the scientific method of inquiry, and discusses the role of models in science.

**Section 2** introduces the basic SI units. scientific notation, and significant digits and distinguishes between precision and accuracy.

Section 3 presents various ways of summarizing data, including tables, graphs, and equations; uses dimensional analysis to check the validity of expressions; and introduces estimation procedures.

## About the Image

The technology shown in this photograph is known as motion capture. In addition to sports research, this technology is used to create synthetic characters in movies based on the motion of human actors. Examples include Jar Jar Binks from Star Wars: Episode I and Gollum from The Lord of the Rings trilogy. Advanced motioncapture technology was also used to film actors in the film Avatar.

The following investigations support the concepts presented in this chapter.

The Circumference-Diameter Ratio of a Circle Physics and Measurement (Core Skill) Time and Measurement (Probeware) Graph Matching (Probeware) Black Box (Open Inquiry)

#### **QUICKLAB**

Metric Prefixes

#### **DEMONSTRATIONS**

Galileo's Hypothesis Measurements Standard Units Accuracy and Precision Significant Figures

#### **CONNECTING TO CHEMISTRY**

Chemistry is about the reactions of chemical elements and compounds. However, the major principles of physics—such as motion, energy, and force—are widely used in studying chemical phenomena. Integrating physical principles into chemical systems and phenomena led to development of a distinctive branch of science called thermodynamics. Thermodynamics essentially studies the conversion of one form of

energy to another form of energy in a chemical system.

Challenge students to provide examples of energy conversions in chemical systems. For example, burning wood releases chemical energy as heat.

## Focus and Motivate ▼

## **Activate Prior Knowledge**

#### **KNOWLEDGE TO REVIEW**

- The scientific method is not a specific sequence of steps that scientists follow but a menu of processes from which a scientist selects those best suited to investigate the problem.
- Scientists use the SI system of measurements in their work.

#### **ITEMS TO PROBE**

• Ability to work with decimal numbers and powers of ten, and to draw, read, and interpret graphs. Ask students to calculate (3  $\times$  10<sup>-5</sup>)(5  $\times$  10<sup>8</sup>).

## **SECTION 1**


**Teaching Tip**

**Teach**


> **[Preview Vocabulary]**
>
> **Latin Word Origins** Explain that the English word *physics* comes from the Latin word *physica*, which means "study of nature." *Physica* is also the basis for the English word *physique*, which means body appearance or body structure.
>
> Exposure to science, both formal and informal, shapes students' current views of physics. Students should be encouraged to express their perceptions and attitudes in a brainstorming session. Students need to realize that applied science, which is aimed at creating technology, interacts with basic science, which strives to develop fundamental ideas to explain natural phenomena. Point out that physics is a very broad field of study that presents an organized way of modeling and interpreting nature. The different areas of basic science specialize in interpreting different aspects of nature (living things, materials,
>
> celestial objects, and so forth). Sometimes, the boundaries between these areas are not clear, but the
>
> basic and applied sciences.
>
> **4 Chapter 1**
>
> fundamental ideas of physics underlie all
>
>
> Identify activities and fields that involve the major areas within physics.
>
> Describe the processes of the scientific method.
>
> Describe the role of models and diagrams in physics.
>
> > Electromagnetism Battery, starter, headlights
>
>
> with their study of physics.
>
> **Below LeveL**
>
> **Differentiated Instruction**
>
> As students work through the chapter, ask them to list terms or words that are used in physics and in their daily lives. For example, terms such as *mechanics, optics, speed, vibration*, and *pendulum* could be included in their lists. Encourage students to list each word's scientific meaning, as well as the more common meaning. Remind students that this type of list will be helpful as they continue
>
> The Physics of Cars Without knowledge of many of the areas of physics, making cars would be impossible.
>
> FIGURE 1.1
>

# What Is Physics? Objectives

#### Key Terms

Vibrations and mechanical waves Optics Shock absorbers, radio speakers Headlights, rearview mirrors

Thermodynamics Efcient engines, use of coolants

model hypothesis system controlled experiment

## The Topics of Physics

and measure what they are studying.

building and operating a car.


Many people consider physics to be a difficult science that is far removed from their lives. This may be because many of the world's most famous

physicists study topics such as the structure of the universe or the incredibly small particles within an atom, often using complicated tools to observe

But everything around you can be described by using the tools of physics. The goal of physics is to use a small number of basic concepts, equations, and assumptions to describe the physical world. These physics principles can then be used to make predictions about a broad range of phenomena. For example, the same physics principles that are used to describe the interaction between two planets can be used to describe the motion of a soccer ball moving toward a goal.

Many physicists study the laws of nature simply to satisfy their curiosity about the world we live in. Learning the laws of physics can be rewarding just for its own sake. Also, many of the inventions, appliances, tools, and buildings we live with today are made possible by the application of physics principles. Physics discoveries often turn out to have unexpected practical applications, and advances in technology can in turn lead to new physics discoveries. Figure 1.1 indicates how the areas of physics apply to

> Spinning motion of the wheels, tires that provide enough friction for traction

Mechanics

study in a number of different ways. Figure 1.3 shows some of the major

AREAS WITHIN PHYSICS

falling objects, friction, weight, spinning objects

processes, engines, refrigerators

springs, pendulums,

sound


astronomy

electrical charge, circuitry, permanent magnets, electromagnets

particle collisions, particle accelerators, nuclear energy

the atom and its parts


The Science of Physics **5**

Name Subjects Examples

objects

motions

and light

interactions between

Thermodynamics heat and temperature melting and freezing

specific types of repetitive

Optics light mirrors, lenses, color,

speed, including very high speeds

areas of physics that will be described in this book.

Mechanics motion and its causes,

Electromagnetism electricity, magnetism,

Relativity particles moving at any

Quantum mechanics behavior of submicroscopic particles

Explain that the words *mechanic* and *mechanics* can have different meanings, depending on the context. The word *mechanic* is used for a skilled person who repairs and maintains machines. The plural of *mechanic* is *mechanics*. However, the term *mechanics* is also used to mean a branch of physics that deals with objects in motion and the forces that cause and change motion.

**English Learners**

FIGURE 1.3

Vibrations and wave phenomena


PRE-AP

Students are already familiar with some principles in physics, such as gravity. Have students design a simple experiment that


principles in physics, such as gravity. Have students design a simple experiment that tests an aspect of gravity and that uses the scientific method. For example, students could

design an experiment to test whether Earth's

gravity pulls different objects toward the ground at the same rate. Experiments should include the steps of the scientific method and some type of model (physical or

mathematical). Choose one or two experiment designs to discuss as a class. Describe the likely

results of each experiment, so that the

including the ball's surroundings, size, spin, weight, color, time in the air, speed, and sound when hitting the ground. The first step toward simplifying this complicated situation is to decide what to study, that is, to define the system. Typically, a single object and the items that immediately affect it are the focus of attention. For instance, suppose you decide to study the ball's motion in the air (before it potentially reaches any of the other players), as shown in Figure 1.6. To study this situation, you can eliminate everything except information that affects the ball's motion.

You can disregard characteristics of the ball that have little or no effect on its motion, such as the ball's color. In some studies of motion, even the ball's spin and size are disregarded, and the change in the position of the

In effect, the physicist studies the motion of a ball by first creating a simple model of the ball and its motion. Unlike the real ball, the model object is isolated; it has no color, spin, or size, and it makes no noise on impact. Frequently, a model can be summarized with a diagram. Another way to summarize these models is to build a computer simulation or

Without models to simplify matters, situations such as building a car or sailing a boat would be too complex to study. For instance, analyzing the motion of a sailboat is made easier by imagining that the push on the boat from the wind is steady and consistent. The boat is also treated as an object with a certain mass being pushed through the water. In other words, the color of the boat, the model of the boat, and the details of its shape are left out of the analysis. Furthermore, the water the boat moves through is treated as if it were a perfectly smooth-flowing liquid with no internal friction. In spite of these simplifications, the analysis can still


system a set of particles or interacting components considered to be a distinct physical entity for the purpose of study


#### FIGURE 1.6

Motion of a Basketball To analyze the basketball's motion, isolate the objects that will affect its motion.

ball will be the only quantity investigated.

small-scale replica of the situation.

**Inclusion**

mechanical model.

make useful predictions of how the sailboat will move.

Have students choose a simple system and construct a model of it. Allow different types of learners to use different modeling methods. For example, visual learners could draw a diagram, while kinesthetic learners could construct a

#### **TEACH FROM VISUALS**

air surrounding the ball.

of simplification?

and its path.

**FIGURE 1.6** Ask students to compare the photograph in **Figure 1.6** with the photograph in **Figure 1.5.** Point out the details relevant to the study of the ball's motion: the direction that the ball was thrown; the forces on the ball; the ball's spin; the ball's location at every instant;

the ball's shape, size, and mass; and the

**Ask** Draw a diagram of the ball's motion. Which details mentioned above did you ignore in your diagram for the purpose

**Answer**: Size, spin, and air resistance normally affect the ball's flight. However, as a first approximation, this study focuses on the trajectory of a model ball and assumes that the effects of air resistance and spin are negligible. Most diagrams will probably just show the ball

The Science of Physics **7**


**Pre-AP**

hand and hold the stack of pennies in the other hand; drop them simultaneously. Tell students to listen carefully and decide which object hits the ground first. It should be difficult to detect any

Hold one coffee filter in one hand and a stack of 10 filters in the other hand; drop them simultaneously. This time, it should be easy to see that 10 filters fall faster than one. How could Galileo defend his hypothesis in the face of such evidence? He identified the role

Fill the clear container with water and drop the single penny and the 10-penny stack into the water simultaneously. This time, the single penny will land on the bottom last. Have students use these experiments to defend or criticize the argument that heavy bodies fall faster

difference in falling time.

of air resistance.

than lighter bodies.

**8 Chapter 1**

**Differentiated Instruction**

Have students research and identify scientific models that are no longer accepted by scientists. For example, models of the atom have been repeatedly revised since the concept of the atom was introduced by the Greek scientist Democritus in 460 BCE.

and identify a hypothesis for testing.

than a lighter object.

either brick alone, as in (b).

Models help guide experimental design.

were meas ured falling from the same point.


Consider the example of Galileo's "thought experiment," in which he modeled the behavior of falling objects in order to develop a hypothesis about how objects fell. At the time Galileo published his work on falling objects, in 1638, scientists believed that a heavy object would fall faster

Galileo imagined two objects of different masses tied together and released at the same time from the same height, such as the two bricks of different masses shown in Figure 1.7. Suppose that the heavier brick falls faster than the lighter brick when they are separate, as in (a). When tied together, the heavier brick will speed up the fall of the lighter brick somewhat, and the lighter brick will slow the fall of the heavier brick somewhat. Thus, the tied bricks should fall at a rate *in between* that of

However, the two bricks together have a greater mass than the heavier brick alone. For this reason, the tied bricks should fall *faster* than the heavier brick, as in (c). Galileo used this logical contradiction to refute the idea that different masses fall at different rates. He hypothesized instead that all objects fall at the same rate in the absence of air resistance, as in (d).

Galileo performed many experiments to test his hypothesis. To be certain he was observing differences due to weight, he kept all other variables the same: the objects he tested had the same size (but different weights) and

The measuring devices at that time were not precise enough to measure the motion of objects falling in air. So, Galileo used the motion of a ball rolling down a ramp as a model of the motion of a falling ball.

