---
chapter: 1
chapter_title: The Science of Physics
section: 2
section_title: SECTION 2
---

#### **SECTION 2**

## **▼ Plan and Prepare**


> **[Preview Vocabulary]**
>
> **Scientific Meaning** Explain the difference between *dimension* and *unit*. Be sure that students understand that a *dimension* refers to a physical quantity such as length or mass. A *unit* represents the numerical measurement of a
>
> generate examples that include both a
>
> dimension and a unit, such as "a length
>
> **Purpose** Give students an overview of
>
> measuring tapes, various clocks, various
>
> metronomes, various bathroom scales,
>
> ranges, ammeters, protractors, graduated
>
> instruments. Ask students to describe
>
> measure properties of objects found in the classroom. Let students walk around
>
> the exhibit and take notes about the
>
> Whenever possible, have students
>
> results in correct units.
>
>
> different methods and units of measure.
>
> perform measurements and report their
>
> what instrument they would use to
>
> pan balance with standard masses,
>
> electronic balance, beam balance.
>
> thermometers of various sizes and
>
> cylinders, measuring cups
>
> **Procedure** Display the various
>
> Materials assortment of measuring
>
> dimension. Then ask students to
>
> of 10 meters" or "a mass of
>
> **Demonstration**
>
> **MEASUREMENTS**
>
> measurement concepts.
>
> instruments, including rulers,
>
> 2.5 kilograms."
>
> **▼** Teach
>
>

#### Objectives

List basic SI units and the quantities they describe.

Convert measurements into scientific notation.

Distinguish between accuracy and precision.

Use significant figures in measurements and calculations.

FIGURE 2.1

Standard Kilogram The

for the United States

kilogram is currently the only SI unit

that is defined by a material object.

The platinum-iridium cylinder shown

here is the primary kilogram standard

Differentiated Instruction

Students who have grown up in the United

States may have difficulty visualizing dimen-

sions in SI units—for example, estimating the

length of an object in centimeters. However,

accurate estimate in inches or feet. In contrast,

these same students might provide a fairly

students who have grown up in countries

where metric or SI units are used may have less difficulty projecting measurements in SI units. Ask these students to work with those

**INCLUSION** 

# Measurements in Experiments

Physicists perform experiments to test hypotheses about how changing

one variable in a situation affects another variable. An accurate analysis

Numerical measurements are different than the numbers used in a

mathematics class. In mathematics, a number like 7 can stand alone and

be used in equations. In science, measurements are more than just a number. For example, a measurement reported as 7 leads to several questions. What physical quantity is being measured—length, mass, time, or something else? If it is length that is being measured, what units were

used for the measurement—meters, feet, inches, miles, or light-years?

The description of *what kind* of physical quantity is represented by a certain measurement is called *dimension*. You are probably already

familiar with three basic dimensions: length, mass, and time. Many other

measurements can be expressed in terms of these three dimensions. For

example, physical quantities such as force, velocity, energy, volume, and

acceleration can all be described as combinations of length, mass, and

time. When we learn about heat and electricity, we will need to add two

The description of  $how \ much$  of a physical quantity is represented by a certain numerical measurement and by the unit with which the quan-

tity is measured. Although each dimension is unique, a dimension can be


measured using different units. For example, the dimension of time can

When scientists do research, they must communicate the results of their

measurements. In 1960, an international committee agreed on a system

of standards, such as the standard shown in Figure 2.1. They also agreed on designations for the fundamental quantities needed for measure-

ments. This system of units is called the Système International d'Unités

in the class who are not as familiar with SI

units. Provide each team of students with

some modeling clay and list several measure-

ments on the board. Then have students use

the modeling clay to represent the measure-

ment. For example, if a measurement listed is

piece of modeling clay to estimate that length.

15 cm, then the students should stretch a

Have students check results with a ruler.

(SI). In SI, there are only seven base units. Each base unit describes a

experiments with each other and agree on a system of units for their

be measured in seconds, hours, or years.

SI is the standard measurement system for science.

single dimension, such as length, mass, or time.

other dimensions to our list, one for temperature and one for electric

of such experiments requires numerical measurements.

Key Terms accuracy

precision significant figures

oigiiiioani iigaroo

**Numbers as Measurements** 

and are reproduced so that every meterstick, kilogram mass, and clock

in the world is calibrated to give consistent results. We will use SI units

throughout this book because they are almost universally accepted in

the units can be combined to form derived units. Derived units are

division. For example, speeds are typically expressed in units of meters

formed by combining the seven base units with multiplication or

units is being introduced, but often these new units merely serve as shorthand ways to refer to combinations of units. For example, forces and

weights are typically measured in units of newtons (N), but a newton is

defined as being exactly equivalent to one kilogram multiplied by meters

per second squared (1 kg•m/s²). Derived units, such as newtons, will be

Physics is a science that describes a broad range of topics and requires a

wide range of measurements, from very large to very small. For example,

solid (0.000 000 001 m). Because these numbers can be extremely difficult

Another approach commonly used in SI is to combine the units with prefixes that symbolize certain powers of 10, as illustrated in Figure 2.3.

distance measurements can range from the distances between stars (about 100 000 000 000 000 000 m) to the distances between atoms in a

to read and write, they are often expressed in powers of 10, such as

Encourage students to make a reference list of

units for themselves. Ask them to list meter,

kilogram, and second at the top of a piece of a paper. Provide them with the tools to measure each of these values (a meterstick, a scale, and a stopwatch). Have them find three things that are a meter in length in the

classroom, three things that have the mass of a kilogram, and three events that are approximately one second in duration. Students

explained throughout this book as they are introduced.

SI uses prefixes to accommodate extremes.

Not every observation can be described using one of these units, but

In other cases, it may appear that a new unit that is not one of the base

science and industry.

per second (m/s).

 $1 \times 10^{17} \,\mathrm{m}$  or  $1 \times 10^{-9} \,\mathrm{m}$ .

**BELOW LEVEL** 

Stephen Dalton/Photo Researchers, Inc.

most accurate timing devices in the

world. NIST-F1 is so accurate that it

will not gain or lose a second in nearly

20 million years. As a public service,

given by NIST-F1 through the Internet,

radio stations WWV and WWVB, and

Units with Prefixes The mass

several different ways:  $1 \times 10^{-5}$  kg,

of this mosquito can be expressed

The Science of Physics

should then have an idea of what these units

represent. Discuss why the focus was on these

particular units and have students describe

how these units are used in physics.

0.01 g, or 10 mg.

the institute broadcasts the time

satellite signals.

ribbons, etc.). Have the groups compare

students decide which ribbon should be

the standard. Ask them to compare their

reasons for selecting a particular ribbon.

There is no particular reason to prefer

any one. Mark two points about 80 cm

apart on a ribbon. Tape the ribbon on

calibrate their ribbon units against this

new standard. Have them repeat their

should be about the same number of

standard ribbon units. Point out that

standards of measure are universally

established through a similar but more

Derived units describe quantities, such


as density, that are calculated from

by similar conventions. Scientific

The Language of

measurements in base units.

rigorous process.

**Physics** 

inches, meters, and miles were defined

measurements of the classroom. Results

the chalkboard and tell the class to

their ribbons and discover that the

lengths were not exactly equal. Let

## **WHY IT MATTERS**

after the orbiter arrived

space, fatally damaged.

NASA/JPL-Caltech; (br) Courtesy NASA/JPL-Caltech

# The *Mars Climate Orbiter Mission*

he Mars Climate Orbiter was a NASA spacecraft designed to take pictures of the Martian surface, generate daily weather maps, and analyze the Martian atmosphere from an orbit about 80 km (50 mi) above Mars. It was also supposed to relay signals from its companion, the Mars Polar Lander, which was scheduled to

land near the edge of the southern polar cap of Mars shortly

The orbiter was launched from Cape Canaveral, Florida, on

December 11, 1998. Its thrusters were fired several times

along the way to direct it along its path. The orbiter reached

Mars nine and a half months later, on September 23, 1999.

A signal was sent to the orbiter to fire the thrusters a final

time in order to push the spacecraft into orbit around the

planet. However, the orbiter did not respond to this final

signal, NASA soon determined that the orbiter had passed

closer to the planet than intended, as close as 60 km (36 mi).

The orbiter most likely overheated because of friction in the

Martian atmosphere and then passed beyond the planet into

The Mars Climate Orbiter was built by Lockheed Martin in Denver, Colorado, while the mission was run by a NASA flight control team at Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California. Review of the failed mission revealed that engineers at Lockheed Martin sent thrust specifications to the flight control team in English units of pounds of force, while the flight control team assumed that the thrust specifications were in newtons, the SI unit for force. Such a

problem normally would be caught by others checking and double-checking specifications, but somehow the error

Unfortunately, communication with the *Mars Polar Lander* was also lost as the lander entered the Martian atmosphere on December 3, 1999. The failure of these and other space exploration missions reveals the inherent difficulty in sending complex technology into the distant, harsh, and

often unknown conditions in space and on other planets.

However, NASA has had many more successes than

escaped notice until it was too late.

The \$125 million Mars Orbiter mission failed

measurement

sometime in the past.

rock-grinding tool.

because of a miscommunication about units of

failures. A later Mars mission, the Exploration Rover

mission, successfully placed two rovers named Spirit and

Opportunity on the surface of Mars, where they collected a

wide range of data. Among other things, the rovers found

convincing evidence that liquid water once flowed on the

surface of Mars. Thus, it is possible that Mars supported life

The Spirit and Opportunity rovers have explored the

surface of Mars with a variety of scientific instruments,

13

including cameras, spectrometers, magnets, and a

## Why It Matters

#### THE MARS CLIMATE ORBITER MISSION

Although SI units are widely used in science, they are not universal. Scientists in different fields often use different systems of units depending on what is most convenient and appropriate to their areas of study.

The lesson of the failure of the

necessarily that all scientists should use

groups working on a project is essential.

Furthermore, any project, especially a

plans and calculations, including the

consistent use of units.

very large or complex one, should have

a systematic plan for double-checking all


Mars Climate Orbiter mission is not

a single system of units, but that

communication between different

**Differentiated Instruction** 

area of 36 cm<sup>2</sup> but the square does.

Draw a rectangle and label its length 9 cm and its width 4 m. Draw a square and label two adjoining sides with a length of 6 cm. Ask students whether both shapes have the same area. Have students work through the calculations to find the area of each shape, checking their units as they work. Students should conclude that the rectangle does not have an

**BELOW LEVEL** 

(b)

Both dimension and units must agree.

quantity that is being sought in a problem or calculation.

(c)

Measurements of physical quantities must be expressed in units that match the dimensions of that quantity. For example, measurements of length cannot be expressed in units of kilograms because units of kilograms describe the dimension of mass. It is very important to be certain that a measurement is expressed in units that refer to the correct dimension. One good technique for avoiding errors in physics is to check the units in an answer to be certain they are appropriate for the dimension of the physical

In addition to having the correct dimension, measurements used in calculations should also have the same units. As an example, consider Figure 2.5(a), which shows two people measuring a room to determine the room's area. Suppose one person measures the length in meters and the other person measures the width in centimeters. When the numbers are multiplied to find the area, they will give a difficult-to-interpret answer in units of cm·m, as shown in Figure 2.5(b). On the other hand, if both measurements are made using the same units, the calculated area is much easier to interpret because it is expressed in units of m², as shown in Figure 2.5(c). Even if the measurements were made in different units, as in the example above, one unit can be easily converted to the other because centimeters and meters are both units of length. It is also necessary to convert one unit to another when working with units from two different systems, such as meters and feet. In order to avoid confusion, it is better to make the conversion to the same units before doing any more arithmetic.

or a large number of small units (small

same value as 2000 pennies.


tiles), just as 20 one-dollar bills have the



> **[Demonstration]**
>

#### **Accuracy and Precision**

**Materials** shoe, metersticks **Procedure** Have three students successively measure the length of a long table with a shoe. Ask students to compare the accuracy of each measurement and the precision of the measuring

tool. The measurement has little accuracy; i.e., it is difficult to estimate a fractional part of a shoe. The tool lacks precision; i.e., repeated measurements produce little agreement. Have three students repeat the measurement with metersticks and compare their results. Are there still differences even though

the meterstick is more precise?

**Significant Figures**

**Demonstration**

significant figures.

183 g and 184 g.

**16 Chapter 1**

salt

**Purpose** Clarify the meaning of

**Materials** pan balance, small paper cup,

**Procedure** Pour salt into the cup on one pan until it is balanced with 183 g. Slowly add small amounts of salt and have students note that the reading remains 183 g until the balance tilts. Try to restore balance by adding 1 g masses (they will probably be too heavy or too light). Ask students to guess the mass of the salt. The answer is actually between

**Purpose** Show the difference between accuracy and precision in measuring length.

#### Accuracy and Precision

Error in experiments must be minimized.

Line of Sight Affects Measurements If you measure this window by keeping your line of sight directly over the measurement (a), you will find that it is 165.2 cm long. If you do not keep your eye directly above the mark, as in (b) and (c), you may report a measurement with significant error.

(a) (b) (c)


Because theories are based on observation and experiment, careful measurements are very important in physics. But no measurement is perfect. In describing the imperfection of a measurement, one must consider both the accuracy, which describes how close the measurement is to the correct value, and the precision, which describes how exact the measurement is. Although these terms are often used interchangeably in everyday speech, they have specific meanings in a scientific discussion. A numeric measure of confidence in a measurement or result is known as *uncertainty*. A lower uncertainty indicates greater confidence. Uncertainties are usually expressed by using statistical methods.

Experimental work is never free of error, but it is important to minimize error in order to obtain accurate results. An error can occur, for example, if a mistake is made in reading an instrument or recording the results. One way to minimize error from human oversight or carelessness is to take repeated measurements to be certain they are consistent.

If some measurements are taken using one method and some are taken using a different method, a type of error called *method error* will result. Method error can be greatly reduced by standardizing the method of taking measurements. For example, when measuring a length with a meterstick, choose a line of sight directly over what is being measured, as shown in Figure 2.6(a). If you are too far to one side, you are likely to overestimate or underestimate the measurement, as shown in Figure 2.6(b) and Figure 2.6(c). Another type of error is *instrument error*. If a meterstick or balance is not in good working order, this will introduce error into any measurements made with the device. For this reason, it is important to be careful with lab equipment. Rough handling can damage balances. If a wooden meterstick gets wet, it can warp, making accurate measurements difficult.

accuracy a description of how close a measurement is to the correct or accepted value of the quantity measured

precision the degree of exactness of a measurement

FIGURE 2.6


**Inclusion**

measurement.

**Differentiated Instruction**

Give visually impaired students two rulers, one with raised centimeter marks, and another with raised centimeter and millimeter marks. Have them use each ruler to measure and cut two 3.5-cm lengths of string by touching and counting the raised marks. Have them compare the two lengths of string. Discuss how the finer spacing affects the precision of their

significant figures those digits in a measurement that are known with certainty plus the first digit that is

Have students assume that the pool is 50.00 ± 0.01 m. That would mean that one swimming pool may be 1 cm shorter than 50 m and a second pool in another location may be 1 cm longer than 50 m. Because a 1500-m race requires a swimmer to swim 30 laps, a swimmer may swim 30 cm less in one pool and 30 cm more in a second pool when completing a 1500 m race. Could this 60-cm difference in the lengths of the races explain why a new record might be set in the first pool? Before students can answer this question, ask them to also consider the precision of the time

measurement of the race.

The Science of Physics **17**


uncertain

between the two marks the end of the pencil is and add a digit to the end of the actual measurement. In this case, the end of the pencil seems to be less than halfway between the two marks, so you would report the measurement

It is important to record the precision of your measurements so that other people can understand and interpret your results. A common convention used in science to indicate precision is known as significant figures. The figures that are significant are the ones that are known for certain, as well

In the case of the measurement of the pencil as about 18.2 cm, the meas urement has three significant figures. The significant figures of a measurement include all the digits that are actually measured (18 cm), plus one *estimated* digit. Note that the number of significant figures is determined by the precision of the markings on the measuring scale. The last digit is reported as a 0.2 (for the estimated 0.2 cm past the 18 cm mark). Because this digit is an estimate, the true value for the meas urement is actually somewhere between 18.15 cm and 18.25 cm. When the last digit in a recorded measurement is a zero, it is difficult to tell whether the zero is there as a placeholder or as a significant digit. For example, if a length is recorded as 230 mm, it is impossible to tell whether this number has two or three significant digits. In other words, it can be difficult to know whether the measurement of 230 mm means the measurement is known to be between 225 mm and 235 mm or is known

Significant figures help keep track of imprecision.

more precisely to be between 229.5 mm and 230.5 mm.

as the first digit that is uncertain.

as 18.2 cm.

Similar rules apply to multiplication. Suppose that you calculate the area of a room by multiplying the width and length. If the room's dimensions are 4.6 m by 6.7 m, the product of these values would be  $30.82\ m^2$ . However, this answer contains four significant figures, which implies that it is more precise than the measurements of the length and width. Because the room could be as small as  $4.55\ m$  by  $6.65\ m$  or as large as  $4.65\ m$  by  $6.75\ m$ , the area of the room is known only to be between  $30.26\ m^2$  and  $31.39\ m^2$ . The area of the room can have only two significant figures because each measurement has only two. So, the area must be rounded off to  $31\ m^2$ . Figure 2.10 summarizes the two basic rules for determining significant figures when you are performing calculations.

containing an estimated digit.

Rule

Calculators do not pay attention to significant figures.

When you use a calculator to analyze problems or measurements, you may be able to save time because the calculator can compute faster than

returning answers with as many digits as the display can show.

requires rounding the results of a calculation. The rules listed in

you can. However, the calculator does not keep track of significant figures.

Calculators often exaggerate the precision of your final results by

To reinforce the correct approach, the answers to the sample problems in this book will always show only the number of significant figures

Providing answers with the correct number of significant figures often

Figure 2.11 on the next page will be used in this book for rounding, and the results of a calculation will be rounded after each type of mathematical

operation. For example, the result of a series of multiplications should be

multiplied by another number. Multiple roundings can increase the error in a calculation, but with this method there is no ambiguity about which rule to apply. You should consult your teacher to find out whether to

rounded using the multiplication/division rule before it is added to another number. Similarly, the sum of several numbers should be rounded according to the addition/subtraction rule before the sum is

round this way or to delay rounding until the end of all calculations.

The value of significant digits can be empha-

than larger units that contain the items. For

sized by asking students to imagine situations in

which exact counts of items are less meaningful

example, if you are pouring a container of milk into large glasses, you are more concerned with the number of glasses you can fill than with the exact amount in each glass. If you spill a few drops of milk, that amount is not significant—it will not affect how many

**RULES FOR CALCULATING WITH SIGNIFICANT FIGURES** 

Given that addition and subtraction take place in columns,

The final answer has the same number of significant figures as the

measurement having the smallest number of significant figures.

round the final answer to the first column from the left

**Examples** 

97.3

+ 5.85

× 5.35

103.15 \_\_round off 103.2

658.05 round off 658

The Science of Physics

glasses you are able to fill. If, however, you

amount of spilled milk would affect the final

knock over one of the filled glasses, that

number of glasses that you have.

# The Language of Physics

In mathematics, we use 97.3, 97.30, 97.300, etc., to represent the same number with a single value (e.g., if x = 97.3 and y = 97.300, then x = y). When numbers represent the results of measurements, they are not pure

mathematical quantities. The numbers

contain additional information about precision. Measured values actually

stand for a range of possible values. This

range is defined by the significant digits.

Here, x could be 97.25 cm, 97.26 cm, or

97.296 cm, or 97.304 cm. There may be a

difference between x and y, although it

**Misconception Alert!** 

Sometimes, students are reluctant to

round off a product so that it has no

decimal digits. They might even think

they misapplied a rule. An example

counterintuitive results. Ask them to

multiply 53.5824 s by 2.14 m/s and

round off. The result. 114.666 336 m.

When results are rounded after each type

of operation, the order of operations used to solve a problem sometimes

from those in this Teacher's Edition and

round at the end of a calculation instead

of after each type of operation, there will


still be correct. If you ask students to

affects the answer. For this reason, students' answers could differ slightly

may familiarize them with such

needs to be reduced to three

significant digits, that is, 115 m.

**Teaching Tip** 

be even more variation.

97.34 cm. But  $\gamma$  could be 97.295 cm,

may not be measurable.

FIGURE 2.10

Type of calculation

addition or subtraction

that the measurements justify.

**Problem Solving** 

**REALITY CHECK** 

multiplication or

division

SECTION 2 FORMATIVE ASSESSMENT

2. Express the following measurements as indicated.

1. Which SI units would you use for the following measurements?

**3.** Perform these calculations, following the rules for significant figures.

**4.** The following students measure the density of a piece of lead three

times. The density of lead is actually  $11.34\,\mathrm{g/cm^3}$ . Considering all of the results, which person's results were accurate? Which were precise?

4. a. accurate and precise

**b.** precise

c. neither

Reviewing Main Ideas

**a.** 6.20 mg in kilograms **b.**  $3 \times 10^{-9}$  s in milliseconds

c. 88.0 km in meters

**a.**  $26 \times 0.02584 = ?$ 

**d.** 63.258 + 734.2 = ?

Were any both accurate and precise?

a. Rachel: 11.32 g/cm³, 11.35 g/cm³, 11.33 g/cm³
b. Daniel: 11.43 g/cm³, 11.44 g/cm³, 11.42 g/cm³
c. Leah: 11.55 g/cm³, 11.34 g/cm³, 11.04 g/cm³

**b.**  $15.3 \div 1.1 = ?$  **c.** 782.45 - 3.5328 = ?

**Critical Thinking** 

**Answers to Section Assessment** 

1. a. meters

**3. a.** 0.67 **b.** 14 **c.** 778.92 **d.** 797.5

**b.** kilograms

**2. a.** 6.20 × 10<sup>-6</sup> kg **b.** 3 × 10<sup>-6</sup> ms **c.** 8.80 × 10<sup>4</sup> m

c. seconds

a. the length of a swimming poolb. the mass of the water in the poolc. the time it takes a swimmer to swim a lap

the numbers are sometimes increased

Assess Use the Formative Assessment

and sometimes decreased.

**▼** Assess and Reteach

on this page to evaluate student

Reteach For students who need

additional instruction, download the

**Response to Intervention** To reassess

students' mastery, use the Section Quiz,

available to print or to take directly

online at HMDScience.com.

mastery of the section.

Section Study Guide.


## **▼ Teach** continued

#### **TEACH FROM VISUALS**

it in the graph?

**Physics** 

the page.


**FIGURE 3.3** Have students verify that the points on the graph correspond to the numbers listed in **Figure 3.2**.

Ask How far have the balls fallen after a time of 0.225 s?

**Answer**: 26 cm (as read from the graph)

data table? How would you justify using

**Answer**: No, we assume that the clock started exactly at the instant the balls

were dropped and that distances were

measured from the dropping point.

In the first equation on this page, the

term change in position stands for the

vertical distance from the point where

the balls were dropped. Likewise, time

of fall specifies the number of seconds

We use the symbols  $\Delta y$  and  $\Delta t$  to

represent the vertical distance between

The Language of

since the balls were dropped.

two points and the time interval,

in the second equation shown on

respectively. These symbols are used

Ask Was the point (0, 0) listed in the

#### FIGURE 3.3

#### Graph of Dropped Ball Data

The graph of these data provides a convenient way to summarize the data and indicate the relationship between the time an object has been falling and the distance it has fallen.

**Differentiated Instruction** 

There are several terms that need to be

mastered when it comes to making and reading a graph. Provide students learning English with a blank piece of paper and highlighter markers. As you walk through the creation of a graph, encourage students to highlight areas such as the *x*-axis, the *y*-axis, and individual points. Students should include

**ENGLISH LEARNERS** 

We can also use the following equation to describe the relationship

(change in position in meters) =  $4.9 \times (\text{time of fall in seconds})^2$ 

This equation allows you to reproduce the graph and make predictions

While mathematicians use equations to describe relationships between

variables, physicists use the tools of mathematics to describe measured or predicted relationships between physical quantities in a situation. For example, one or more variables may affect the outcome of an experiment. In the case of a prediction, the physical equation is a compact statement

based on a model of the situation. It shows how two or more variables are related. Many of the equations in physics represent a simple description

To make expressions as simple as possible, physicists often use letters to describe specific quantities in an equation. For example, the letter v is

used to denote speed. Sometimes, Greek letters are used to describe

mathematical operations. For example, the Greek letter  $\Delta$  (delta) is often used to mean "difference or change in," and the Greek letter  $\Sigma$  (sigma) is

With these conventions, the word equation above can be written

 $\Delta y = 4.9(\Delta t)^2$ 

The units in which these quantities are measured are also often

The abbreviation  $\Delta y$  indicates the vertical change in a ball's position from

abbreviated with symbols consisting of a letter or two. Most physics books provide some clues to help you keep track of which letters refer to quanti-

ties and variables and which letters are used to indicate units. Typically, variables and other specific quantities are abbreviated with letters that are **boldfaced** or *italicized*. (The difference between the two is described

their own definitions of these features and

color code them to their marked-up graph

about the change in position for any arbitrary time during the fall.

between the variables in the experiment:

Physics equations describe relationships.

of the relationship between physical quantities.

its starting point, and  $\Delta t$  indicates the time elapsed.

for future reference.

used to mean "sum" or "total."

as follows:

FIGURE 3.5

of 88 km/h.

**Dimensional Analysis in** 

Dimensional analysis can be a useful

check for many types of problems,

725 km if it moves with a speed

The Science of Physics

This way, students can comprehend that the term *length* in the equation is a variable,

similar to the variables used in many math-

ematical equations.

23

including those involving how much

time it would take for this car to travel

**Speed Calculations** 

Point out that dimensional analysis is a

equation you are using gives the kind of

good tool for checking whether the

quantity you want to calculate. For example, when you want to find volume

(V) based on density  $(\rho)$  and mass (m),

you may find that you erroneously set

 $V = \frac{\rho}{m}$  before doing the calculations.

Simply replace each variable with its

dimensions and see whether the

 $cm^{3} = \frac{g}{cm^{3}} = \frac{g}{cm^{3}} \frac{1}{g} = \frac{1}{cm^{3}}$ 

 $V = \frac{\rho}{m}$  must be invalid.

This mismatch reveals that the equation


equation balances.

 $V = \frac{\rho}{m}$ 

**Evaluating Physics Equations** 

equation or result can possibly be valid.

equation must have the same dimensions.

SJohn P. Kelly/Getty Images

for this situation.

students.

**Problem Solving** 

Although an experiment is the ultimate way to check the validity of a

Suppose a car, such as the one in Figure 3.5, is moving at a speed of

725 km. How can you decide a good way to solve the problem?

88 km/h and you want to know how much time it will take it to travel

You can use a powerful procedure called dimensional analysis.

only if they have the same dimensions, and the two sides of any given

Let us apply this technique to the problem of the car moving at a

 $\frac{\text{length}}{\text{time}} \times \text{length} = \frac{\text{length}^2}{\text{time}}$ 

Clearly, the result of this calculation does not have the dimensions of time, which is what you are calculating. This equation is not a valid one

speed of 88 km/h. This measurement is given in dimensions of length

over time. The total distance traveled has the dimension of length. Multiplying these numbers together gives the following dimensions:

**DECONSTRUCTING PROBLEMS** 

 $\frac{\text{length}}{\text{time}} \times \text{length} = \frac{\text{length}^2}{\text{time}}$ 

 $\frac{x}{\text{time}} \times x = \frac{x^2}{\text{time}}$ 

The given equation may confuse some

Use a dummy variable *x* as length in the equation to show that the given equation is the same as the equation below:

Dimensional analysis makes use of the fact that dimensions can be treated

as algebraic quantities. For example, quantities can be added or subtracted

Dimensional analysis can weed out invalid equations.

physics equation, several techniques can be used to evaluate whether an

Multiplying this by the estimate of the total number of cars in the United States gives an annual consumption of  $6 \times 10^{10}$  gal.

$$(12 \times 10^7 \text{ cars}) \left( \frac{500 \text{ gal}}{1 \text{ car}} \right) = 6 \times 10^{10} \text{ gal}$$

## **SECTION 3 FORMATIVE ASSESSMENT**

#### Reviewing Main Ideas

- 1. Indicate which of the following physics symbols denote units and which denote variables or quantities.
- **b.** *c* **c.** *C*
- **d.** *t*
- **e.** T **f.** T
- 2. Determine the units of the quantity described by each of the following combinations of units:
  - **a.** kg (m/s) (1/s)
- **b.**  $(kg/s) (m/s^2)$
- **c.**  $(kg/s)(m/s)^2$
- **d.** (kg/s)(m/s)
- 3. Which of the following is the best order-of-magnitude estimate in meters of the height of a mountain?
  - **a.** 1 m
- **b.** 10 m
- **c.** 100 m
- **d.** 1000 m

#### **Interpreting Graphics**

4. Which graph in Figure 3.6 best matches the data?

| Volume of air (m | 3) Mass of air (kg) |
|------------------|---------------------|
| 0.50             | 0.644               |
| 1.50             | 1.936               |
| 2.25             | 2.899               |
| 4.00             | 5.159               |
| 5.50             | 7.096               |

#### FIGURE 3.6

#### **Oritical Thinking**

- 5. Which of the following equations best matches the data from item 4?
  - **a.**  $(mass)^2 = 1.29$  (volume)
- **b.** (mass)(volume) = 1.29
- **c.** mass = 1.29 (volume)
- **d.** mass =  $1.29 \text{ (volume)}^2$


> **[Answers to Section Assessment]**
>
> The Science of Physics
>
> 25
>
> - 1. units: a, e variables or quantities: b, c, d, f
> - 2. a. kg·m/s<sup>2</sup>
> - **b.** kg•m/s<sup>3</sup>
> - **c.** kg•m<sup>2</sup>/s<sup>3</sup>
> - **d.** kg•m/s<sup>2</sup>
> - **3.** d
> - **4.** (a)
> - **5.** C
>
>
> **Assess** Use the Formative Assessment on this page to evaluate student mastery of the section.
>
> Reteach For students who need additional instruction, download the Section Study Guide.
>
> **Response to Intervention** To reassess students' mastery, use the Section Quiz, available to print or to take directly online at HMDScience.com.
>

