---
chapter: 1
chapter_title: The Science of Physics
section: 3
section_title: SECTION 3
---

### **SECTION 3**



> **[Preview Vocabulary]**
>
> Academic Vocabulary Explain that the word expression is used in this chapter to describe a meaningful combination of mathematical terms, such as those found in a scientific equation.
>

#### Teach ▼


> **[Teaching Tip]**
>
> Point out that although the time intervals shown in Figure 3.2 cannot be measured by direct observation, these data can be recorded using advanced technological tools, including a computer connected to a probe.
>

#### **TEACH FROM VISUALS**

FIGURE 3.2 In order to process the information contained in Figure 3.2, students need to look at the numbers closely.

Ask Were the data collected at regular time intervals?

**Answer**: Yes, every  $\frac{1}{15}$  of a second

Ask According to the distances displayed in the table, did one of the balls appear to fall faster than the other one?

**Answer**: No, the measured distances vary by only one digit in the last significant figure.

Ask According to the distances displayed in the table, did the golf ball travel the same distance during every time interval?

**Answer**: No. the distance traveled increased with each time interval.

### **▼ Teach** continued

#### **TEACH FROM VISUALS**

FIGURE 3.3 Have students verify that the points on the graph correspond to the numbers listed in Figure 3.2.

Ask How far have the balls fallen after a time of 0.225 s?

**Answer**: 26 cm (as read from the graph)

Ask Was the point (0, 0) listed in the data table? How would you justify using it in the graph?

**Answer**: No, we assume that the clock started exactly at the instant the balls were dropped and that distances were measured from the dropping point.

### The Language of **Physics**

In the first equation on this page, the term change in position stands for the vertical distance from the point where the balls were dropped. Likewise, time of fall specifies the number of seconds since the balls were dropped.

We use the symbols  $\Delta y$  and  $\Delta t$  to represent the vertical distance between two points and the time interval, respectively. These symbols are used in the second equation shown on the page.

#### FIGURE 3.3

#### **Graph of Dropped Ball Data**

The graph of these data provides a convenient way to summarize the data and indicate the relationship between the time an object has been falling and the distance it has fallen

We can also use the following equation to describe the relationship between the variables in the experiment:

(change in position in meters) =  $4.9 \times (\text{time of fall in seconds})^2$ 

This equation allows you to reproduce the graph and make predictions about the change in position for any arbitrary time during the fall.

#### Physics equations describe relationships.

While mathematicians use equations to describe relationships between variables, physicists use the tools of mathematics to describe measured or predicted relationships between physical quantities in a situation. For example, one or more variables may affect the outcome of an experiment. In the case of a prediction, the physical equation is a compact statement based on a model of the situation. It shows how two or more variables are related. Many of the equations in physics represent a simple description of the relationship between physical quantities.

To make expressions as simple as possible, physicists often use letters to describe specific quantities in an equation. For example, the letter v is used to denote speed. Sometimes, Greek letters are used to describe mathematical operations. For example, the Greek letter  $\Delta$  (delta) is often used to mean "difference or change in," and the Greek letter  $\Sigma$  (sigma) is used to mean "sum" or "total."

With these conventions, the word equation above can be written as follows:

$$\Delta y = 4.9(\Delta t)^2$$

The abbreviation  $\Delta y$  indicates the vertical change in a ball's position from its starting point, and  $\Delta t$  indicates the time elapsed.

The units in which these quantities are measured are also often abbreviated with symbols consisting of a letter or two. Most physics books provide some clues to help you keep track of which letters refer to quantities and variables and which letters are used to indicate units. Typically, variables and other specific quantities are abbreviated with letters that are **boldfaced** or *italicized*. (The difference between the two is described



> **[Differentiated Instruction — English Learners]**
>
> There are several terms that need to be mastered when it comes to making and reading a graph. Provide students learning English with a blank piece of paper and highlighter markers. As you walk through the creation of a graph, encourage students to highlight areas such as the x-axis, the y-axis, and individual points. Students should include
>
> their own definitions of these features and color code them to their marked-up graph for future reference.
>
> in the chapter "Two-Dimensional Motion and Vectors.") Units are abbreviated with regular letters (sometimes called roman letters). Some examples of variable symbols and the abbreviations for the units that measure them are shown in Figure 3.4.
>
> As you continue to study physics, carefully note the introduction of new variable quantities, and recognize which units go with them. The tables provided in Appendices C-E can help you keep track of these abbreviations.
>
> FIGURE 3.4
>
> | ABBREVIATIONS FOR VARIABLES AND UNITS |            |           |                    |  |  |
> |---------------------------------------|------------|-----------|--------------------|--|--|
> | Quantity                              | Symbol     | Units     | Unit abbreviations |  |  |
> | change in vertical position           | $\Delta y$ | meters    | m                  |  |  |
> | time interval                         | $\Delta t$ | seconds   | S                  |  |  |
> | mass                                  | m          | kilograms | kg                 |  |  |
>

#### **Evaluating Physics Equations**

Although an experiment is the ultimate way to check the validity of a physics equation, several techniques can be used to evaluate whether an equation or result can possibly be valid.

#### Dimensional analysis can weed out invalid equations.

Suppose a car, such as the one in Figure 3.5, is moving at a speed of 88 km/h and you want to know how much time it will take it to travel 725 km. How can you decide a good way to solve the problem?

You can use a powerful procedure called dimensional analysis. Dimensional analysis makes use of the fact that dimensions can be treated as algebraic quantities. For example, quantities can be added or subtracted only if they have the same dimensions, and the two sides of any given equation must have the same dimensions.

Let us apply this technique to the problem of the car moving at a speed of 88 km/h. This measurement is given in dimensions of length over time. The total distance traveled has the dimension of length. Multiplying these numbers together gives the following dimensions:

$$\frac{\text{length}}{\text{time}} \times \text{length} = \frac{\text{length}^2}{\text{time}}$$

Clearly, the result of this calculation does not have the dimensions of time, which is what you are calculating. This equation is not a valid one for this situation.

#### FIGURE 3.5

#### **Dimensional Analysis in Speed Calculations**

Dimensional analysis can be a useful check for many types of problems, including those involving how much time it would take for this car to travel 725 km if it moves with a speed

#### The Science of Physics

23

#### This way, students can comprehend that the term length in the equation is a variable, similar to the variables used in many mathematical equations.

### **Problem Solving**

#### **DECONSTRUCTING PROBLEMS**

The given equation may confuse some students.

$$\frac{\text{length}}{\text{time}} \times \text{length} = \frac{\text{length}^2}{\text{time}}$$

Use a dummy variable x as length in the equation to show that the given equation is the same as the equation below:

$$\frac{x}{\text{time}} \times x = \frac{x^2}{\text{time}}$$


> **[Misconception Alert]**
>
> Students may think that algebraic symbols representing variable quantities must always be the same letters shown in the table. Point out that physicists tend to *choose* different symbols for each dimension in different contexts and that there are few fixed rules. For instance, as shown in Figure 3.4, one symbol for change in position is  $\Delta y$ ; change in position can also by symbolized by  $\Delta x$ , d, s, l, or h.
>
> **[Teaching Tip]**
>
> Point out that dimensional analysis is a good tool for checking whether the equation you are using gives the kind of quantity you want to calculate. For example, when you want to find volume (V) based on density ( $\rho$ ) and mass (m), you may find that you erroneously set  $V = \frac{\rho}{m}$  before doing the calculations. Simply replace each variable with its dimensions and see whether the equation balances.
>
> $$V = \frac{\rho}{m}$$
>
> $$cm^3 = \frac{g}{cm^3} = \frac{g}{cm^3} \frac{1}{g} = \frac{1}{cm^3}$$
>
> This mismatch reveals that the equation  $V = \frac{\rho}{m}$  must be invalid.
>

### **▼ Teach** continued


> **[Teaching Tip]**
>
> To expand the method of simplifying units in a product such as the one given in the text, use products such as the example below. Show students that the units in denominators and numerators act like the factors of a multiplication, although they do not have exactly the same attributes. We can simplify any unit from one of the denominators with any unit from one of the numerators. In other words, for simplification purposes, it is not necessary to have all the simplified units next to one another.
>

#### **Example:**

$$\left(\frac{12 \text{ m}}{24 \text{ h}}\right) \left(\frac{4 \text{ km}}{12 \text{ min}}\right) \left(\frac{1 \text{ h}}{34 \text{ m}}\right)$$


> **[Did You Know?]**
>
> The physicist Enrico Fermi made the first nuclear reactor at the University of Chicago in 1942. Fermi was also well known for his ability to make quick order-of-magnitude calculations, such as estimating the number of piano tuners in New York City.
>
> To calculate an answer that will have the dimension of time, you should take the distance and divide it by the speed of the car, as follows:
>
> $$\frac{length}{length/time} = \frac{length \times time}{length} = time \qquad \frac{725 \text{ km} \times 1.0 \text{ h}}{88 \text{ km}} = 8.2 \text{ h}$$
>
> In a simple example like this one, you might be able to identify the valid equation without dimensional analysis. But with more complicated problems, it is a good idea to check your final equation with dimensional analysis before calculating your answer. This step will prevent you from wasting time computing an invalid equation.
>

#### Order-of-magnitude estimations check answers.

Because the scope of physics is so wide and the numbers may be astronomically large or subatomically small, it is often useful to estimate an answer to a problem before trying to solve the problem exactly. This kind of estimate is called an *order-of-magnitude* calculation, which means determining the power of 10 that is closest to the actual numerical value of the quantity. Once you have done this, you will be in a position to judge whether the answer you get from a more exacting procedure is correct.

For example, consider the car trip described in the discussion of dimensional analysis. We must divide the distance by the speed to find the time. The distance, 725 km, is closer to  $10^3$  km (or 100 km) than to  $10^2$  km (or 100 km), so we use  $10^3$  km. The speed, 88 km/h, is about  $10^2$  km/h (or 100 km/h).

$$\frac{10^3 \, \text{km}}{10^2 \, \text{km/h}} = 10 \, \text{h}$$

This estimate indicates that the answer should be closer to 10 than to 1 or to 100 (or  $10^2$ ). The correct answer (8.2 h) certainly fits this range.

Order-of-magnitude estimates can also be used to estimate numbers in situations in which little information is given. For example, how could you estimate how many gallons of gasoline are used annually by all of the cars in the United States?

To find an estimate, you will need to make some assumptions about the average household size, the number of cars per household, the distance traveled, and the average gas mileage.

First, consider that the United States has about 300 million people. Assuming that each family of about five people has two cars, an estimate of the number of cars in the country is 120 million.

Next, decide the order of magnitude of the average distance each car travels every year. Some cars travel as few as  $1000 \, \text{mi}$  per year, while others travel more than  $100 \, 000 \, \text{mi}$  per year. The appropriate order of magnitude to include in the estimate is  $10 \, 000 \, \text{mi}$ , or  $10^4 \, \text{mi}$ , per year.

If we assume that cars average 20 mi for every gallon of gas, each car needs about 500 gal per year.

$$\left(\frac{10\,000\,\text{mar}}{1\,\text{year}}\right)\left(\frac{1\,\text{gal}}{20\,\text{mar}}\right) = 500\,\text{gal/year}$$
 for each car

### **Problem Solving**

#### **DECONSTRUCTING PROBLEMS**

Use the following deconstruction method to show an alternative simplification of last product given in the text:

$$\left(\frac{10,000 \text{ mi}}{\text{year}}\right) \times \left(\frac{1 \text{ gal}}{20 \text{ mi}}\right) = \left(\frac{10,000 \text{ mi}}{20 \text{ mi}}\right) \times \left(\frac{1}{1 \text{ year}}\right) \times \left(\frac{1 \text{ gal}}{1}\right) = (500) \left(\frac{1 \text{ gal}}{1 \text{ year}}\right) =$$

500 gal/year for each car

Multiplying this by the estimate of the total number of cars in the United States gives an annual consumption of  $6 \times 10^{10}$  gal.

$$(12 \times 10^7 \text{ cars}) \left( \frac{500 \text{ gal}}{1 \text{ car}} \right) = 6 \times 10^{10} \text{ gal}$$

### **SECTION 3 FORMATIVE ASSESSMENT**

#### Reviewing Main Ideas

- 1. Indicate which of the following physics symbols denote units and which denote variables or quantities.
- **b.** *c* **c.** *C*
- **d.** *t*
- **e.** T **f.** T
- 2. Determine the units of the quantity described by each of the following combinations of units:
  - **a.** kg (m/s) (1/s)
- **b.**  $(kg/s) (m/s^2)$
- **c.**  $(kg/s)(m/s)^2$
- **d.** (kg/s)(m/s)
- 3. Which of the following is the best order-of-magnitude estimate in meters of the height of a mountain?
  - **a.** 1 m
- **b.** 10 m
- **c.** 100 m
- **d.** 1000 m

#### **Interpreting Graphics**

4. Which graph in Figure 3.6 best matches the data?

| Volume of air (m | 3) Mass of air (kg) |
|------------------|---------------------|
| 0.50             | 0.644               |
| 1.50             | 1.936               |
| 2.25             | 2.899               |
| 4.00             | 5.159               |
| 5.50             | 7.096               |

#### FIGURE 3.6

#### **Oritical Thinking**

- 5. Which of the following equations best matches the data from item 4?
  - **a.**  $(mass)^2 = 1.29$  (volume)
- **b.** (mass)(volume) = 1.29
- **c.** mass = 1.29 (volume)
- **d.** mass =  $1.29 \text{ (volume)}^2$


> **[Answers to Section Assessment]**
>
> The Science of Physics
>
> 25
>
> - 1. units: a, e variables or quantities: b, c, d, f
> - 2. a. kg·m/s<sup>2</sup>
> - **b.** kg•m/s<sup>3</sup>
> - **c.** kg•m<sup>2</sup>/s<sup>3</sup>
> - **d.** kg•m/s<sup>2</sup>
> - **3.** d
> - **4.** (a)
> - **5.** C
>
>
> **Assess** Use the Formative Assessment on this page to evaluate student mastery of the section.
>
> Reteach For students who need additional instruction, download the Section Study Guide.
>
> **Response to Intervention** To reassess students' mastery, use the Section Quiz, available to print or to take directly online at HMDScience.com.
>

