---
chapter: 2
chapter_title: Motion in One Dimension
section: 1
section_title: SECTION 1 Displacement and Velocity KEY TERMS
---

# CHAPTER 2

### **Chapter Overview**

**Section 1** introduces the concepts and relationships between displacement, time, speed, and velocity.

**Section 2** describes the difference between accelerated motion and nonaccelerated motion and introduces the kinematic equations for constant acceleration.

**Section 3** explores freely falling bodies as examples of motion with constant acceleration.

### About the Image

This high-speed train is emerging from the Box Tunnel in western England. When this 2939 m—long tunnel opened in 1841 as part of the Great Western Railway, it was the longest railroad tunnel in the world.

The following investigations support the concepts presented in this chapter.

#### **LABS**

Motion

Acceleration (Probeware)

Free-Fall Acceleration (Core Skill)

Free-Fall Acceleration (Probeware)

Free Fall (Probeware)

#### **QUICKLAB**

Time Interval of Free Fall

#### **DEMONSTRATIONS**

Displacement

Acceleration

Constant Acceleration

### Focus and Motivate ▼

### **Activate Prior Knowledge**

#### **KNOWLEDGE TO REVIEW**

- The number of significant figures in a number equals the number of reliably known digits plus one estimated digit.
- SI measurements of motion are based on a set of three standards: m. kg. and s.
- Graphs and tables provide a way to organize data and recognize relationships.

#### **ITEMS TO PROBE**

- Unit conversions: Ask the students to convert from m/s to km/h.
- **Significant figures:** Ask the students to identify the number of significant digits in a set of numbers on the board. Make sure that they understand that 50 m/s has only one significant digit.

#### **CONNECTING TO HISTORY**

The motion of objects has challenged scientists for millennia; early Greek philosophers such as Aristotle studied kinematics in the 4th century BCE. The ancient view of the universe may seem alien to us. but Aristotle believed that there were five elements: four terrestrial (earth, water, air, and fire) and one heavenly (the quintessence). The terrestrial elements always moved in straight lines, but the motion of the quintessence was circular.

Aristotle posited that each element had its natural place in the universe. Objects could be displaced from their natural place through violent motion, but would return to their natural place through natural motion. Throwing a rock into the air would be an example of violent motion on its way up, but natural motion would cause the rock to return to its natural place. These qualitative rules often sufficed, but scientists began to question Aristotle's theories around 1350,

when a group of philosophers began to analyze motion quantitatively. Their analyses of acceleration and average speed questioned Aristotle's simplified notions of motion and would later inform Galileo's work.

After briefly explaining this history to students, ask them to speculate about the kind of observations that may have caused scientists to question Aristotle's ideas. How might they have analyzed this motion quantitatively in the 14th century?

special effort to analyze motion as a physicist does.

#### One-dimensional motion is the simplest form of motion.

One way to simplify the concept of motion is to consider only the kinds of motion that take place in one direction. An example of this onedimensional motion is the motion of a commuter train on a straight track, as in Figure 1.1.

In this one-dimensional motion, the train can move either forward or backward along the tracks. It cannot move left and right or up and down. This chapter deals only with one-dimensional motion. In later chapters, you will learn how to describe more complicated motions such as the motion of thrown baseballs and other projectiles.


velocity.

interval.


**SECTION 1**


> **[Preview Vocabulary]**
>
> **Scientific Meanings** To see how many of the vocabulary words students are familiar with, ask some of them to verbally describe something they saw in motion during the day. Do they use words like *velocity*? They may tend to use words like *fast, slow, distance,* or *speed up*. Explain to them that when scientists describe motion, they use specific words that may have slightly different meanings than students would expect.
>

### **Teach**

### **The Language of Physics**

Although this chapter discusses displacement, velocity, and acceleration, the concept of vectors is not introduced here. For the purposes of this chapter, it is sufficient to describe the direction of a quantity with a positive or negative sign because the focus is on motion in one dimension. The transition to two-dimensional motion and vectors is made in the chapter "Two-Dimensional Motion and Vectors."


> **[Misconception Alert]**
>
> Many students may have difficulty understanding that the magnitude of a displacement is the length of the straight-line path between two points rather than the distance traveled. Point out that although the odometer on a car shows that it has been driven 5 mi, the displacement may have been 0 mi.
>

#### frame of reference a system for specifying the precise location of objects in space and time

Objectives Describe motion in terms of frame of reference, displacement, time, and

Calculate the displacement of an object traveling at a known velocity for a specific time

Construct and interpret graphs of position versus time.

#### FIGURE 1.1

Frames of Reference The motion of a commuter train traveling along a straight route is an example of one-dimensional motion. Each train can move only forward and backward along the tracks.

#### Motion takes place over time and depends upon the frame of reference.

It seems simple to describe the motion of the train. As the train in Figure 1.1 begins its route, it is at the first station. Later, it will be at another station farther down the tracks. But Earth is spinning on its axis, so the train, stations, and the tracks are also moving around the axis. At the same time, Earth is moving around the sun. The sun and the rest of the solar system are moving through our galaxy. This galaxy is traveling through space as well.

When faced with a complex situation like this, physicists break it down into simpler parts. One key approach is to choose a frame of reference against which you can measure changes in position. In the case of the train, any of the stations along its route could serve as a convenient frame of reference. When you select a reference frame, note that it remains fixed for the problem in question and has an origin, or starting point, from which the motion is measured.



> **[Differentiated Instruction — English Learners]**
>
> The concept of dimensions may not be familiar to students. They may have heard the word *dimension* used figuratively but not literally. Explain the difference between using the word to mean "magnitude or scope" and using the word to mean "a measure of spatial extent," as it is used in the text. Engage students in a discussion about the difference between literal and figurative meanings in general.
>
> If an object is at rest (not moving), its position does not change with respect to a fixed frame of reference. For example, the benches on the platform of one subway station never move down the tracks to another station.
>
> In physics, any frame of reference can be chosen as long as it is used consistently. If you are consistent, you will get the same results, no matter which frame of reference you choose. But some frames of reference can make explaining things easier than other frames of reference.
>
> For example, when considering the motion of the gecko in Figure 1.2, it is useful to imagine a stick marked in centimeters placed under the gecko's feet to define the frame of reference. The measuring stick serves as an x-axis. You can use it to identify the gecko's initial position and its final position.
>

#### **Displacement**

As any object moves from one position to another, the length of the straight line drawn from its initial position to the object's final position is called the displacement of the object.

#### Displacement is a change in position.

The gecko in Figure 1.2 moves from left to right along the *x*-axis from an initial position,  $x_i$ , to a final position,  $x_f$ . The gecko's displacement is the difference between its final and initial coordinates, or  $x_f - x_i$ . In this case, the displacement is about 61 cm (85 cm - 24 cm). The Greek letter *delta*  $(\Delta)$  before the x denotes a change in the position of an object.

#### **Displacement**

$$\Delta x = x_f - x_i$$

displacement = change in position = final position - initial position

#### FIGURE 1.2

Space Frontiers/Taxi/Getty Images

#### **Measuring Displacement**

A gecko moving along the x-axis from  $x_i$  to  $x_t$  undergoes a displacement of  $\Delta x = x_f - x_i$ .

#### Conceptual Challenge

Space Shuttle A space shuttle takes off from Florida and circles Earth several times, finally landing in California. While the shuttle is in flight, a photographer flies from Florida to California to take pictures of the astronauts when they step off the shuttle. Who undergoes the greater displacement, the photographer or the astronauts?

Roundtrip What is the difference between the displacement of the photographer flying from Florida to California and the displacement of the astronauts flying from California back to Florida?

displacement the change in position of an object

#### Tips and Tricks

A change in any quantity, indicated by the Greek symbol delta  $(\Delta)$ , is equal to the final value minus the initial value. When calculating displacement, always be sure to subtract the initial position from the final position so that your answer has the correct sign.

Motion in One Dimension

37


> **[Differentiated Instruction — Below Level]**
>
> Have students experiment with selecting different reference points. Draw a line on a long sheet of paper and place a coin somewhere on that line. Have students select several reference points on the line and measure the distance to the coin from each of those reference points. Move the coin to another point on the line and repeat the measurements. As a class, find the displacement given by using each
>
> reference point. Discuss that although all the measured distances differ, the displacement is the same.
>

#### **TEACH FROM VISUALS**

FIGURE 1.2 Point out to students that the choice of a reference point for the coordinate system is arbitrary, but once chosen, the same point must be used throughout the problem.

Ask What would the displacement of the gecko be if the zero end of the meterstick had been lined up with the gecko's first position?

**Answer**: the same (because where we put the meterstick does not affect how far the gecko moved)

### The Language of **Physics**

In this book,  $\Delta x$  refers to a change in position along the x-axis of whatever coordinate system is chosen and  $\Delta y$ refers to a change in position along the  $\gamma$ -axis. In later chapters, these two variables refer to the x and y components of a displacement vector.

#### **Answers**

#### **Conceptual Challenge**

- 1. neither (because the displacements are the same)
- 2. The difference between these two displacements is in their direction—one is positive and the other negative.

### **▼ Teach** continued


> **[Demonstration]**
>
> **DISPLACEMENT**
>
> **Purpose** Demonstrate the importance of direction in reference to displacement.
>
> Materials one meterstick, 3 pieces of modeling clay, one toothpick or paper clip, one toy car
>
> **Procedure** Place the meterstick on edge so that the zero mark is to the students' left and the students can see the numbers. Put the toothpick in one of the pieces of modeling clay to represent the initial position.
>
> For positive displacement, place the initial position marker and car somewhere between 0 and 10 cm. Roll the car down the meterstick to some point past the 50 cm mark and place the final position marker (the second piece of modeling clay) at the car's new position. Ask the students to calculate the displacement of the car. It should be a positive number.
>
> For negative displacement, move the initial position marker to the car, and roll the car back toward the zero end of the meterstick. Stop the car and place the third position marker. Ask the students to calculate the displacement for the second leg of the trip. It should be a negative number.
>
> Now have students calculate the total displacement of the car.
>

#### FIGURE 1.3

#### **Comparing Displacement and**

**Distance** When the gecko is climbing a tree, the displacement is measured on the y-axis. Again, the gecko's position is determined by the position of the same point on its body.

Now suppose the gecko runs up a tree, as shown in Figure 1.3. In this case, we place the measuring stick parallel to the tree. The measuring stick can serve as the y-axis of our coordinate system. The gecko's initial and final positions are indicated by  $y_i$  and  $y_f$ , respectively, and the gecko's displacement is denoted as  $\Delta y$ .

#### Displacement is not always equal to the distance traveled.

Displacement does not always tell you the distance an object has moved. For example, what if the gecko in Figure 1.3 runs up the tree from the 20 cm marker (its initial position) to the 80 cm marker. After that, it retreats down the tree to the 50 cm marker (its final position). It has traveled a total distance of 90 cm. However, its displacement is only 30 cm  $(y_f - y_i = 50 \text{ cm} - 20 \text{ cm} = 30 \text{ cm})$ . If the gecko were to return to its starting point, its displacement would be zero because its initial position and final position would be the same.

#### Displacement can be positive or negative.

Displacement also includes a description of the direction of motion. In one-dimensional motion, there are only two directions in which an object can move, and these directions can be described as positive or negative.

In this book, unless otherwise stated, the right (or east) will be considered the positive direction and the left (or west) will be considered the negative direction. Similarly, upward (or north) will be considered positive, and downward (or south) will be considered negative. Figure 1.4 gives examples of determining displacements for a variety of situations.



> **[Differentiated Instruction — Inclusion]**
>
> To help kinesthetic learners reinforce the difference between displacement and distance. have students act out the difference in the classroom. Choose three students to stand in one location in the room. Have them all move to a second location in the room, but with each student taking a different route. Then ask the other students to estimate how far each student moved. Point out that all
>
> three students started and ended at the same place, so their displacements are all the same.
>

#### Velocity

Where an object started and where it stopped does not completely describe the motion of the object. For example, the ground that you're standing on may move 8.0 cm to the left. This motion could take several years and be a sign of the normal slow movement of Earth's tectonic plates. If this motion takes place in just a second, however, you may be experiencing an earthquake or a landslide. Knowing the speed is important when evaluating motion.

#### Average velocity is displacement divided by the time interval.

Consider the car in Figure 1.5. The car is moving along a highway in a straight line (the x-axis). Suppose that the positions of the car are  $x_i$  at time  $t_i$  and  $x_f$  at time  $t_f$ . In the time interval  $\Delta t = t_f - t_i$ , the displacement of the car is  $\Delta x = x_f - x_i$ . The average velocity,  $v_{avg'}$ , is defined as the displacement divided by the time interval during which the displacement occurred. In SI, the unit of velocity is meters per second, abbreviated as m/s.

Average Velocity 
$$v_{avg} = \frac{\Delta x}{\Delta t} = \frac{x_f - x_i}{t_f - t_i}$$
 average velocity = 
$$\frac{\text{change in position}}{\text{change in time}} = \frac{\text{displacement}}{\text{time interval}}$$

The average velocity of an object can be positive or negative, depending on the sign of the displacement. (The time interval is always positive.) As an example, consider a car trip to a friend's house 370 km to the west (the negative direction) along a straight highway. If you left your house at 10 A.M. and arrived at your friend's house at 3 р.м., your average velocity would be as follows:

$$v_{avg} = \frac{\Delta x}{\Delta t} = \frac{-370 \text{ km}}{5.0 \text{ h}} = -74 \text{ km/h} = 74 \text{ km/h} \text{ west}$$

This value is an average. You probably did not travel exactly 74 km/h at every moment. You may have stopped to buy gas or have lunch. At other times, you may have traveled more slowly as a result of heavy traffic. To make up for such delays, when you were traveling slower than 74 km/h, there must also have been other times when you traveled faster

The average velocity is equal to the constant velocity needed to cover the given displacement in a given time interval. In the example above, if you left your house and maintained a velocity of 74 km/h to the west at every moment, it would take you 5.0 h to travel 370 km.


> **[Did You Know?]**
>
> The branch of physics concerned with motion and forces is called mechanics The subset of mechanics that describes motion without regard to its causes is called kinematics.
>
> average velocity the total displacement divided by the time interval during which the displacement occurred
>
> Average velocity is not always equal to the average of the initial and final velocities. For instance, if you drive first at 40 km/h west and later at 60 km/h west, your average velocity is not necessarily 50 km/h west.
>
> Motion in One Dimension
>
> 39
>
> **[Differentiated Instruction — Pre-AP]**
>
> The average velocity of a plane flying across the United States from east to west is different from a plane flying west to east. Have students research plane schedules and calculate the average velocities of a plane flying the same route in opposite directions. Make sure students take time zones into account when determining flight times. Ask students to hypothesize about why there is a difference.
>
> **[Misconception Alert]**
>
> Many students believe that the average speed is always the average of the starting and ending speeds, as discussed in the Tips and Tricks on this student page. (Note that the student Tips and Tricks discusses average velocity rather than average speed because average speed has not yet been introduced.) Use counterexamples to address this misconception.
>
> **Example:** A car travels from city A to city B (100 km). If the first half of the distance is driven at 50 km/h and the second half is driven at 100 km/h, the average speed is given by the following relation.
>
> $$\frac{100 \text{ km}}{\frac{50 \text{ km}}{50 \text{ km/h}} + \frac{50 \text{ km}}{100 \text{ km/h}}} = 67 \text{ km/h}$$
>
> The average speed would be 75 km/h if the car spent equal time at 50 km/h and 100 km/h.
>

### **▼ Teach** continued

### **Classroom Practice**

#### **AVERAGE VELOCITY AND** DISPLACEMENT

A doctor travels to the east from city A to city B (75 km) in 1.0 h. What is the doctor's average velocity?

**Answer**: 75 km/h to the east

#### **PROBLEM GUIDE A**

Use this guide to assign problems.

**SE** = Student Edition Textbook

**PW** = Sample Problem Set I (online)

**PB** = Sample Problem Set II (online)

|               |    | reatern det ii (aritiire)               |
|---------------|----|-----------------------------------------|
| $\Delta x$    | SE | Sample, 1–3;<br>Ch. Rvw. 7–10, 11*, 38b |
|               | PW | 3b                                      |
|               | РВ | 8, 10                                   |
| $\Delta t$    | SE | 4–6a; Ch. Rvw. 34, 35*,<br>38a          |
|               | PW | Sample, 1–3a,<br>4a, 8b                 |
|               | РВ | 7, 9                                    |
| $v_{\rm avg}$ | SE | 6b; Ch. Rvw. 9c-d, 10a, 51*             |
|               | PW | 4b, 5–8b                                |
|               | РВ | Sample, 1–6                             |

#### **Answers**

#### Practice A

**1.** 2.0 km to the east

\*Challenging Problem

- **2.** 3.1 km
- 3. 680 m to the north
- **4.** 3.00 h
- **5.** 0.43 h
- **6. a.** 6.4 h
  - **b.** 77 km/h to the south

#### **Average Velocity and Displacement**

Sample Problem A During a race on level ground, Andrea runs with an average velocity of 6.02 m/s to the east. What is Andrea's displacement after 137 s?

♠ ANALYZE

Given:  $v_{avg} = 6.02 \text{ m/s}$ 

 $\Delta t = 137 \text{ s}$ 

 $\Delta x = ?$ Unknown:

#### **Tips and Tricks**

The calculator answer is 824.74 m, but both the values for velocity and time have three significant figures, so the displacement must be reported as 825 m.

Rearrange the average velocity equation to solve for displacement.

$$v_{avg} = \frac{\Delta x}{\Delta t}$$

$$\Delta x = v_{avg} \Delta t$$

$$\Delta x = v_{avg} \Delta t = (6.02 \text{ m/s})(137 \text{ s}) = 825 \text{ m to the east}$$

#### **Practice**

- 1. Heather and Matthew walk with an average velocity of 0.98 m/s eastward. If it takes them 34 min to walk to the store, what is their displacement?
- 2. If Joe rides his bicycle in a straight line for 15 min with an average velocity of 12.5 km/h south, how far has he ridden?
- 3. It takes you 9.5 min to walk with an average velocity of 1.2 m/s to the north from the bus stop to the museum entrance. What is your displacement?
- 4. Simpson drives his car with an average velocity of 48.0 km/h to the east. How long will it take him to drive 144 km on a straight highway?
- 5. Look back at item 4. How much time would Simpson save by increasing his average velocity to 56.0 km/h to the east?
- 6. A bus travels 280 km south along a straight path with an average velocity of 88 km/h to the south. The bus stops for 24 min. Then, it travels 210 km south with an average velocity of 75 km/h to the south.
  - a. How long does the total trip last?
  - **b.** What is the average velocity for the total trip?

### **Problem Solving**

#### **REALITY CHECK**

When students are calculating average velocity, make sure that they are using a consistent coordinate system. The positive direction should stay the same when determining both the final and the initial positions. Remind students that negative and positive direction depends on the chosen coordinate system. In one problem a negative velocity may mean that the object is moving west, but in another problem it may mean it is moving down.

Ask students to translate the initial values of a problem and their answer into words. Does the answer describe what they would expect the outcome of the problem to be?

#### Velocity is not the same as speed.

In everyday language, the terms *speed* and *velocity* are used interchangeably. In physics, however, there is an important distinction between these two terms. As we have seen, velocity describes motion with both a direction and a numerical value (a magnitude) indicating how fast something moves. However, speed has no direction, only magnitude. An object's average speed is equal to the distance traveled divided by the time interval for the motion.

$$average speed = \frac{distance traveled}{time of travel}$$

#### Velocity can be interpreted graphically.

The velocity of an object can be determined if the object's position is known at specific times along its path. One way to determine this is to make a graph of the motion. Figure 1.6 represents such a graph. Notice that time is plotted on the horizontal axis and position is plotted on the vertical axis.

The object moves 4.0 m in the time interval between t=0 s and t=4.0 s. Likewise, the object moves an additional 4.0 m in the time interval between t=4.0 s and t=8.0 s. From these data, we see that the average velocity for each of these time intervals is +1.0 m/s (because  $v_{avg}=\Delta x/\Delta t=4.0$  m/4.0 s). Because the average velocity does not change, the object is moving with a constant velocity of +1.0 m/s, and its motion is represented by a straight line on the position-time graph.

For any position-time graph, we can also determine the average velocity by drawing a straight line between any two points on the graph. The slope of this line indicates the average velocity between the positions and times represented by these points. To better understand this concept, compare the equation for the slope of the line with the equation for the average velocity.

Average Velocity

$$slope = \frac{rise}{run} = \frac{change \ in \ vertical \ coordinates}{change \ in \ horizontal \ coordinates}$$

$$v_{avg} = \frac{\Delta x}{\Delta t} = \frac{x_f - x_i}{t_f - t_i}$$

#### FIGURE 1.6

Position-Time Graph The motion of an object moving with constant velocity will provide a straight-line graph of position versus time. The slope of this graph indicates the velocity.

### Conceptual Challenge

Book on a Table A book is moved once around the edge of a tabletop with dimensions  $1.75\,\mathrm{m}\times2.25\,\mathrm{m}$ . If the book ends up at its initial position, what is its displacement? If it completes its motion in 23 s, what is its average velocity? What is its average speed?

Travel Car A travels from New York to Miami at a speed of 25 m/s.
Car B travels from New York to
Chicago, also at a speed of 25 m/s.
Are the velocities of the cars equal?
Explain.

Motion in One Dimension

#### 41



> **[Differentiated Instruction — English Learners]**
>
> English learners may have trouble understanding the difference between velocity and speed. Draw a diagram of a car taking a very curvy road. Explain that it takes the car 1 hour to get from one end of the road to the other. The speed is the total distance over the total time. Now draw a line connecting the two endpoints. Explain that displacement is the straight line between the two endpoints and that velocity is the
>
> distance represented by that line divided by the total time.
>
> **[Key Models and Analogies]**
>
> The idea of a car race, such as the Indianapolis 500, may help students understand the difference between speed and velocity. Cars have *speedometers*, not "velocitometers." Indy cars spend hours going very fast (high speed) but getting nowhere (zero velocity). In order to have a nonzero velocity, the car must finish at some point other than the starting point.
>
> **[Teaching Tip]**
>
> Probe your students' understanding of the concept of *slope*. Many students may remember the concept from math class. Students will most likely remember slope described by the phrase *rise over run* in algebra class.
>

#### **Answers**

#### **Conceptual Challenge**

- 1. The book's displacement is zero, its average velocity is zero, and its average speed is 0.35 m/s.
- 2. The velocity of car A does not equal the velocity of car B even though their speeds are the same because they are traveling in different directions.

### **▼ Teach** continued


> **[Misconception Alert]**
>
> Some students will use raw data points to calculate the slope of a line. Students should be shown how to draw a best-fit line. Caution students to use points on the best-fit line instead of the raw data points, which may or may not be on the line.
>

#### FIGURE 1.7

Position-Time Graphs These position-versus-time graphs show that Object 1 moves with a constant positive velocity. Object 2 is at rest. Object 3 moves with a constant negative velocity.

instantaneous velocity the velocity of an object at some instant or at a specific point in the object's path

Figure 1.7 represents straight-line graphs of position versus time for three different objects. Object 1 has a constant positive velocity because its position increases uniformly with time. Thus, the slope of this line is positive. Object 2 has zero velocity because its position does not change (the object is at rest). Hence, the slope of this line is zero. Object 3 has a constant negative velocity because its position decreases with time. As a result, the slope of this line is negative.

#### Instantaneous velocity may not be the same as average velocity.

Now consider an object whose position-versus-time graph is not a straight line, but a curve, as in Figure 1.8. The object moves through larger and larger displacements as each second passes. Thus, its velocity increases with time.

For example, between t = 0 s and t = 2.0 s, the object moves 8.0 m, and its average velocity in this time interval is  $4.0\ m/s$  (because  $v_{avg} = 8.0 \text{ m}/2.0 \text{ s}$ ). However, between t = 0 s and t = 4.0 s, it moves 32 m, so its average velocity in this time interval is 8.0 m/s (because  $v_{avg} = 32~\mathrm{m}/4.0~\mathrm{s}$  ). We obtain different average velocities, depending on the time interval we choose. But how can we find the velocity at an instant of time?

To determine the velocity at some instant, such as t = 3.0 s, we study a small time interval near that instant. As the intervals become smaller and smaller, the average velocity over that interval approaches the exact velocity at t = 3.0 s. This is called the **instantaneous velocity.** One way to determine the instantaneous velocity is to construct a straight line that is tangent to the position-versus-time graph at that instant. The slope of this tangent line is equal to the value of the instantaneous velocity at that point. For example, the instantaneous velocity of the object in Figure 1.8 at t = 3.0 s is 12 m/s. The table lists the instantaneous velocities of the object described by the graph in Figure 1.8. You can verify some of these values by measuring the slope of the curve.

#### FIGURE 1.8

#### **Finding Instantaneous Velocity**

The instantaneous velocity at a given time can be determined by measuring the slope of the line that is tangent to that point on the position-versus-time graph.

| VELOCITY-TIME DATA |         |  |
|--------------------|---------|--|
| t (s)              | v (m/s) |  |
| 0.0                | 0.0     |  |
| 1.0                | 4.0     |  |
| 2.0                | 8.0     |  |
| 3.0                | 12.0    |  |
| 4.0                | 16.0    |  |



> **[Differentiated Instruction — Pre-AP]**
>
> Have students draw their own position-time graphs and choose a specific point on the curve where they would like to find instantaneous velocity. To construct the tangent line at that specific point, students should draw a series of lines that intersect the curve at two points. For the first line, students should choose two points on the curve which are equidistant from their chosen point and connect those two points with a line.
>
> As they construct more lines, the two points connected by the lines should move closer and closer to the chosen point. Eventually, the line will approximate a tangent line to the chosen point. Help students recognize that they are calculating average velocities over shorter and shorter time intervals.
>
> **[Formative Assessment]**
>

#### Reviewing Main Ideas

- 1. What is the shortest possible time in which a bacterium could travel a distance of 8.4 cm across a Petri dish at a constant speed of 3.5 mm/s?
- 2. A child is pushing a shopping cart at a speed of 1.5 m/s. How long will it take this child to push the cart down an aisle with a length of 9.3 m?
- 3. An athlete swims from the north end to the south end of a 50.0 m pool in 20.0 s and makes the return trip to the starting position in 22.0 s.
  - a. What is the average velocity for the first half of the swim?
  - b. What is the average velocity for the second half of the swim?
  - c. What is the average velocity for the roundtrip?
- 4. Two students walk in the same direction along a straight path, at a constant speed—one at 0.90 m/s and the other at 1.90 m/s.
  - a. Assuming that they start at the same point and the same time, how much sooner does the faster student arrive at a destination 780 m away?
  - b. How far would the students have to walk so that the faster student arrives 5.50 min before the slower student?

#### Critical Thinking

5. Does knowing the distance between two objects give you enough information to locate the objects? Explain.

#### Interpreting Graphics

6. Figure 1.9 shows position-time graphs of the straight-line movement of two brown bears in a wildlife preserve. Which bear has the greater average velocity over the entire period? Which bear has the greater velocity at *t* = 8.0 min? Is the velocity of bear A always positive? Is the velocity of bear B ever negative?

#### FIGURE 1.9

#### DTSI Graphics HRW • Holt Physics **Answers to Section Assessment**


- **1.** 24 s
- **2.** 6.2 s
  - **3. a.** 2.50 m/s to the south
    - **b.** 2.27 m/s to the north
    - **c.** 0.0 m/s
  - **4. a.** 460 s
    - **b.** 570 m
  - **5.** No, because a single distance could correspond to a variety of different positions of the objects.
  - **6.** bear B; bear A; no; no

### **Assess and Reteach**

**Assess** Use the Formative Assessment on this page to evaluate student mastery of the section.

**Reteach** For students who need additional instruction, download the Section Study Guide.

**Response to Intervention** To reassess students' mastery, use the Section Quiz, available to print or to take directly online at **HMDScience.com**.

#### SECTION 1 Displacement and Velocity KEY TERMS

- Displacement is a change of position in a certain direction, not the total distance traveled.
- The average velocity of an object during some time interval is equal to the displacement of the object divided by the time interval. Like displacement, velocity has both a magnitude (called speed) and a direction.
- The average velocity is equal to the slope of the straight line connecting the initial and final points on a graph of the position of the object versus time.

frame of reference displacement average velocity instantaneous velocity

