---
chapter: 3
chapter_title: Two-Dimensional Motion and Vectors
section: 1
section_title: SECTION 1 Introduction to Vectors
---

# CHAPTER 3 Instruction and Intervention Support

## Two-Dimensional Motion and Vectors

Interactive Whiteboard activities, and Visual Concepts.

**Chapter Resources** 

■ Textbook: Introduction to Vectors

Properties of Vectors • and more

■ Textbook: Vector Operations

Adding Vectors Algebraically

■ Textbook: Projectile Motion

Animated Physics: Projectile Motion

Motion of a Projectile • and more

Visual Concepts: Projectile Motion • Horizontal

Teaching Visuals: Vertical Motion of a Projectile

Visual Concepts: Frame of Reference • Relative Motion • Variables for Relative Motion
 Teaching Visuals: Frames of Reference

PowerPresentations

PowerPresentations

PowerPresentations

PowerPresentations

■ Textbook: Relative Motion

Visual Concepts: Comparing Scalar and Vector

Quantities • Graphical Addition of Vectors •

Teaching Visuals: Graphical Method of Vector Addition • Commutative Property of Vectors

Visual Concepts: Resolving Vector Components •

▼ Teaching Visuals: The Pythagorean Theorem and the Tangent Function • Adding Vectors That Are Not Perpendicular • Adding Vectors Algebraically

Instruction

Section

3.1

3.2

3.3

3.4

**78A** Chapter 3

■ The Teacher's Edition wrap has extensive teaching support for every lesson, including Misconception Alerts, Teach from Visuals, Demonstrations, Teaching Tips, Differentiated Instruction, and Problem Solving.

■ Several additional presentation tools are available online for every chapter, including Animated Physics features,

Labs and Demonstrations

■ Lab: Vector Treasure Hunt

■ **Demonstration:** Vector Addition

■ **Demonstration:** Air Resistance

■ Lab: Projectile Motion (Probeware)

■ QuickLab: Projectile Motion

■ **Lab:** Velocity of a Projectile

■ **Lab:** Parabolic Path (STEM)

Go Online for Materials Lists and Solutions Lists.

Level (TE wrap)

**Where do I find it?**

**■ Chapter Summary Audio Files**

**■ Differentiated Instruction:** Inclusion and Below

Animated Physics **■ ■** Demonstrations (TE wrap) **■ ■** Labs **■ ■** Power Presentations **■ ■** QuickLabs **■ ■ ■** Teaching Visuals **■ ■** Textbook **■ ■ ■** Visual Concepts **■ ■**

Interactive Demos **■ ■** Concept Maps **■ ■** Sample Problem Set I **■ ■** Sample Problem Set II **■ ■** Scientific Reasoning Skill Builder **■ ■** Study Guide **■ ■**

Chapter Summary Audio Files **■ ■**

Two-Dimensional Motion and Vectors **78B**

Differentiated Instruction (TE wrap) **■**

**Assessment**

**Enrichment and Challenge**

**■ Differentiated Instruction:** Pre-AP (TE Wrap) **■ Physics on the Edge:** Special Relativity and

**■ Careers in Physics:** Kinesiologist (SE)

**Online Assessment and Remediation**

**■ Section Quizzes ■ Chapter Tests A and B ■ Alternative Assessment (SE)**

Velocities (SE)

**■ Study Guide Concept Maps** 

> **Interactive Demos Sample Problem Set I Sample Problem Set II**

**■ Scientific Reasoning Skill Builder**

**■ ExamView Banks**

**PRINT DVD ONLINE**


## **CHAPTER 3**

**ONLINE** Physics

ONLINE LABS
Vector Treasure Hunt

Why It Matters

**CONNECTING TO ART** 

In physics, a *vector* includes the direction of a

quantity and its magnitude. In graphic design,

mathematical equations rather than points in

space. Vector graphics are drawn by comput-

ers following mathematical instructions. These

vector statements define where each line

should appear in an image. Because vector

graphics are rendered by actively drawn lines,

rather than by points mapped in space, they

vector graphics are images defined by

Velocity of a Projectile Projectile Motion

# Two-Dimensional

SECTION 1 Introduction to Vectors

Vector Operations

**SECTION 4** 

Projectile Motion

Relative Motion

**Why It Matters** 

which objects are

Infimated

79

HMDScience.com

Projectile Motion

can be scaled up or down without changing

Invite students who have knowledge of

computer-based art to discuss their experi-

graphics. What are the differences between

image, and what happens when this occurs?

How does the term vector graphics relate to

these types of images? How can a vector

graphic be rendered as a bitmap or raster

the use of the term vector in physics?

ences with vector graphics and bitmap

resolution or pixelation.

projected into the air.

In this chapter, you will

use vectors to analyze two-dimensional motion and to solve problems in

## Focus and Motivate ▼

• Displacement is a change in location relative to a reference point.

Velocity includes speed and direction.Acceleration is the rate of change of

velocity with respect to time. It has

• Displacement versus distance: Have

students decide displacement and distance values for scenarios listed on the board, such as round trips versus one-way trips or a walk from one place

Acceleration and velocity: Ask students to describe the effects of the four possible combinations of acceleration and velocity in one dimension: a > 0, v > 0: a < 0, v > 0:

a > 0, v < 0; a < 0, v < 0.


both magnitude and direction.

**ITEMS TO PROBE** 

Activate Prior Knowledge KNOWLEDGE TO REVIEW

straight line.

scalar a physical quantity that has

**vector** a physical quantity that has both magnitude and direction

**Length of Vector Arrows** 

The lengths of the vector arrows

two soccer players' velocities.

represent the magnitudes of these

Differentiated Instruction

Visual and kinesthetic learners will benefit from a

demonstration of scalar versus vector quantities.

Invite two students to walk across the classroom

at the same speed but in opposite directions. As

a class, discuss the motion of the two students.

Is their speed the same? Yes. Is their motion the

same? No. How is it different? They were going

The scalar quantity (speed) is the same for

these two students, but their vector is

**INCLUSION** 

in different directions.

magnitude but no direction

limited to two directions, forward and backward. Mathematically, we

Vectors indicate direction; scalars do not.

described these directions of motion with a positive or negative sign. That

method works only for motion in a straight line. This chapter explains a method of describing the motion of objects that do not travel along a

Each of the physical quantities encountered in this book can be catego-

that has magnitude but no direction. Examples of scalar quantities are speed, volume, and the number of pages in this textbook. A **vector** is a

Displacement is an example of a vector quantity. An airline pilot

planning a trip must know exactly how far and which way to fly. Velocity is also a vector quantity. If we wish to describe the velocity of a bird, we must

specify both its speed (say, 3.5 m/s) and the direction in which the bird is

flying (say, northeast). Another example of a vector quantity is acceleration.

In physics, quantities are often represented by symbols, such as *t* for time. To help you keep track of which symbols represent vector quantities and

which are used to indicate scalar quantities, this book will use **boldface** 

type to indicate vector quantities. Scalar quantities will be in italics. For

When writing a vector on your paper, you can distinguish it from a scalar

One way to keep track of vectors and their directions is to use dia-

different. Ask students to imagine other

situations where speed is the same but

traveling the same stretch of highway in

different directions.

direction is different. For example, two cars

grams. In diagrams, vectors are shown as arrows that point in the direc-

tion of the vector. The length of a vector arrow in a diagram is propor-

tional to the vector's magnitude. For example, in Figure 1.1 the arrows represent the velocities of the two soccer players running toward the

example, the speed of a bird is written as v = 3.5 m/s. But a velocity,

which includes a direction, is written as v = 3.5 m/s to the northeast.

by drawing an arrow above the abbreviation for a quantity, such as

physical quantity that has both direction and magnitude.

Vectors are represented by boldface symbols.

 $\overrightarrow{v} = 3.5 \text{ m/s}$  to the northeast.

soccer ball.

rized as either a scalar quantity or a vector quantity. A scalar is a quantity


**▼ Plan and Prepare** 

**Preview Vocabulary** 

Latin Word Origins The word vector

comes from the Latin word for *carrier* 

or conveyor. In biology and medicine,

the term is used to describe organisms

such as mosquitoes, fleas, and ticks that

carry and spread disease. In physics, this

quantities that have secondary charac-

Carry a paper cutout of an arrow with

demonstrate the direction of vectors.

Establish a convention for distinguishing

vectors from scalars for use in your

classroom. Using an arrow above the

variable is a good substitute for bold

on a chalkboard. Make sure to be

type, which would be hard to reproduce

consistent when using this convention.

above the symbol to designate a vector,

vector as well as its magnitude and units.

FIGURE 1.1 Tell students that the arrows

in the figure represent velocity, that is,

they represent both speed and

Ask Why do we consider velocity

instead of speed in order to decide

which player reaches the ball first?

a player may run very fast but not

**Answer**: Direction is important because

For instance, when you use an arrow

be sure to signify the direction of the

**TEACH FROM VISUALS** 

direction.

toward the ball.


you to class and use it as a tool to

The Language of

**Physics** 

term is used to visually represent

teristics, such as direction.

**Teaching Tip** 

**▼** Teach

actual motion of the box.


Did YOU Know?

The word *vector* is also used by airline

A resultant vector represents the sum of two or more vectors.

look like? Student should draw a stick figure

pushing a box and an arrow in the direction of the push. What does the teacher pushing the

When adding vectors, you must make certain that they have the same

## **▼ Teach** continued


> **[Misconception Alert]**
>
> Students may have difficulty visualizing the movement of the toy car on the walkway. Illustrate the situation on the board, and emphasize that the motion represented in **Figure 1.3** is drawn as viewed by a stationary observer above
>
> the walkway. Frame of reference will be
>
> The triangle method of vector addition
>
> is also called the polygon method, the
>
> head-to-tail method, or the tip-to-tail
>
> FIGURE 1.4 Reinforce your students'
>
> pointing out that if the runner starts
>
> and ends at the positions shown in
>
> Ask How can the runner increase
>
> between distance and displacement by
>
> **Figure 1.4**, the runner's displacement will
>
> be the same regardless of the path the
>
> distance but begin and end at the same
>
> **Answer**: The runner can take a different,
>
> longer path but will have to double back somewhere along the path to end up at
>
> understanding of the difference
>
> covered later in the chapter.
>
> The Language of
>
> **TEACH FROM VISUALS**
>
> runner chooses to follow.
>
> **Physics**
>
> method.
>
> points?
>
> the same point.
>
>

#### **Properties of Vectors**

Now consider a case in which two or more vectors act at the same point. When this occurs, it is possible to find a resultant vector that has the same net effect as the combination of the individual vectors. Imagine looking down from the second level of an airport at a toy car moving at 0.80 m/s across a walkway that moves at 1.5 m/s. How can you determine what the car's resultant velocity will look like from your view point?

 $\label{lem:constraints} \textbf{Vectors can be moved parallel to themselves in a diagram.}$ 

Note that the car's resultant velocity while moving from one side of the walkway to the other will be the combination of two independent motions. Thus, the moving car can be thought of as traveling first at 0.80 m/s across

the walkway and then at 1.5 m/s down the walkway. In this way, we can

to its previous alignment (so that it still points in the same direction).

draw a given vector anywhere in the diagram as long as the vector is parallel

Thus, you can draw one vector with its tail starting at the tip of the

other as long as the size and direction of each vector do not change. This

process is illustrated in Figure 1.3. Although both vectors act on the car at the same point, the horizontal vector has been moved up so that its tail

begins at the tip of the vertical vector. The resultant vector can then be

Again, the magnitude of the resultant vector can be measured using a

Vectors can be added in any order.

When two or more vectors are added, the sum is

idea is demonstrated by a runner practicing for a

independent of the order of the addition. This

marathon along city streets, as represented in

**Figure 1.4.** The runner executes the same four displacements in each case, but the order is

different. Regardless of which path the runner

vector sum of two or more vectors is the same

regardless of the order in which the vectors are

added, provided that the magnitude and direc-

takes, the runner will have the same total displacement, expressed as **d**. Similarly, the

tion of each vector remain the same.

**A.** A paper airplane moves at a constant velocity of 10 m/s. What is its resultant

velocity if it moves with a parallel wind

B. A stunt man tries to run backward on a

velocity is 8 m/s and the treadmill is

moving at a velocity of 9 m/s. What is

treadmill. The stuntman's constant

Vector subtraction makes use of the definition of the negative of a vector.

The negative of a vector is defined as a vector with the same magnitude as

the original vector but opposite in direction. For instance, the negative of the velocity of a car traveling 30 m/s to the west is -30 m/s to the west,

gust of 19 m/s?

the resultant velocity?

ruler, and the angle can be measured with a protractor. In the next section, we will develop a technique for adding vectors that is less time-consuming

drawn from the tail of the first vector to the tip of the last vector. This

method is known as the triangle (or polygon) method of addition.

because it involves a calculator instead of a ruler and protractor.

To subtract a vector, add its opposite.

car moving at a velocity of 0.80 m/s

(b) across a moving walkway with a

velocity of 1.5 m/s (c) can be found

 $v_{walkway} = 1.5 \text{ m/s}$ 

(c)

 $v_{resultant}$ 

**Commutative Property of Vectors** A marathon runner's

path (a) or (b) because the vectors can be added in any order.

displacement, d, will be the same regardless of whether the runner takes

using a ruler and a protractor.

(p)

**Problem Solving** 

draw the vectors.

**REALITY CHECK** 

Students will better understand the

commutative property of vector addition if

they work several examples on paper with a

following examples and encourage them to

illustrate each situation before drawing the

this point. Instead, emphasize that students should be able to set up each problem and

ruler and protractor. Provide students with the

vectors. The actual answer is not important at

**Assess** Use the Formative Assessment on this page to evaluate student

**Response to Intervention** To reassess students' mastery, use the Section Quiz, available to print or to take directly

Two-Dimensional Motion and Vectors **83**

**Reteach** For students who need additional instruction, download the

mastery of the section.

Section Study Guide.

online at **HMDScience.com**.


Reviewing Main Ideas

c. the duration of the flight d. the displacement of the flight

point? Use graphical techniques.

Use graphical techniques. Critical Thinking

**Answers to Section Assessment**

**3.** 204 km/h at 75° north of east **4.** 89 km/h at 54° north of east

techniques.

one cycle?

**1. a.** vector **b.** scalar **c.** scalar **d.** vector **e.** scalar **2.** 126 m at (1.0 × 101

**5.** zero

a. the acceleration of a plane as it takes off b. the number of passengers on the plane

e. the amount of fuel required for the flight

1. Which of the following quantities are scalars, and which are vectors?

number −2. The result is a vector with a magnitude two times the initial velocity but pointing in the opposite direction, written as −2**vcab**.

SECTION 1 FORMATIVE ASSESSMENT

2. A roller coaster moves 85 m horizontally, then travels 45 m at an angle of 30.0° above the horizontal. What is its displacement from its starting

4. While flying over the Grand Canyon, the pilot slows the plane down to one-half the velocity in item 3. If the wind's velocity is still 75 km/h toward the southeast, what will the plane's new resultant velo city be?

5. The water used in many fountains is recycled. For instance, a single water particle in a fountain travels through an 85 m system and then returns to the same point. What is the displacement of this water particle during

)° above the horizontal


3. A novice pilot sets a plane's controls, thinking the plane will fly at 2.50 × 102 km/h to the north. If the wind blows at 75 km/h toward the southeast, what is the plane's resultant velocity? Use graphical

**SECTION 2** 



#### Determining Resultant Magnitude and Direction

Earlier, we found the magnitude and direction of a resultant graphically. However, this approach is time-consuming, and the accuracy of the answer depends on how carefully the diagram is drawn and measured. A simpler method uses the Pythagorean theorem and the tangent function.

#### Use the Pythagorean theorem to find the magnitude of the resultant.

Imagine a tourist climbing a pyramid in Egypt. The tourist knows the height and width of the pyramid and would like to know the distance covered in a climb from the bottom to the top of the pyramid. Assume that the tourist climbs directly up the middle of one face.

horizontal displacement, ∆*x*, equals the distance from one edge of the pyramid to the middle, or half the pyramid's width. Notice that these two vectors are perpendicular and form a right triangle with the dis-

As shown in Figure 2.4(a), the Pythagorean theorem states that for any right triangle, the square of the hypotenuse—the side opposite the right angle—equals the sum of the squares of the other two sides, or legs.

*c*<sup>2</sup> = *a*<sup>2</sup> + *b*<sup>2</sup> **(length of hypotenuse)2 = (length of one leg)2 + (length of other leg)2**

In Figure 2.4(b), the Pythagorean theorem is applied to find the tourist's displacement. The square of the displacement is equal to the sum of the square of the horizontal displacement and the square of the vertical displacement. In this way, you can find out the magnitude of the dis-

**x**

**d y**


, the Δ is neither

As can be seen in Figure 2.3, the magnitude of the tourist's vertical displacement, ∆*y*, is the height of the pyramid. The magnitude of the

Pythagorean Theorem for Right Triangles

placement, **d**.

placement, *d*.

FIGURE 2.4

*c*

(a) The Pythagorean theorem can be applied to any right triangle. (b) It can also be applied to find the magnitude of a resultant displacement.

Using the Pythagorean Theorem

*a*

*c = a* + *b d = x* + <sup>2</sup> <sup>2</sup> <sup>2</sup> <sup>2</sup> <sup>2</sup> *y* <sup>2</sup>

*b*

**Deconstructing Problems**

example, in *d*<sup>2</sup> = Δ*x*<sup>2</sup> + Δ*y*<sup>2</sup>

mathematics and physics.

(a) (b)

Emphasize the importance of recognizing what each symbol in an equation stands for. For

a variable nor a coefficient. In fact, both Δ*x* and Δ*y* are unique variables. That is, Δ*x* or Δ*y* can be replaced with only one value. Challenge students to investigate more about the symbol Δ, *delta*, and what it stands for in

#### FIGURE 2.3

pyramid.

∆*x*

#### A Triangle Inside of a Pyramid

Because the base and height of a pyramid are perpendicular, we can find a tourist's total displacement, d, if we know the

height, ∆*y*, and width, 2∆*x*, of the

**d**


∆*y*

**2**∆*x*


> **[Misconception Alert]**
>
> Students often try to apply the Pythagorean theorem to triangles that do not contain a right angle. Point out that the Pythagorean theorem can be used only with a right triangle. Some students may know the Law of Cosines, which applies to all triangles. This law
>
> states that *c*<sup>2</sup> = *a*<sup>2</sup> + *b*<sup>2</sup> − 2*abcosθ*. The Law of Cosines can be used to calculate one side of any triangle when the opposite angle and the lengths of the other two sides are known. In this expression, *c* is the unknown side, *θ* is the angle opposite *c*, and *a* and *b* are the two known sides. Some students may attempt to use the Law of Cosines to add nonperpendicular vectors. This approach will give the correct answer, but it entails more computation and is more prone to student error when more than two vectors are to be added.
>
> **Teaching Tip**
>
> vector addition.
>
> Point out that finding the resultant for the pyramid is fairly simple because the height, half-width, and hypotenuse form
>
> Two-Dimensional Motion and Vectors **85**
>
> a right triangle. It is important to mention at this point that right triangles will also allow students to find the *x* and *y* components that are important for
>
> **Finding Resultant Magnitude and Direction**
>
> the bottom of the pyramid to the top?
>
> **ANALYZE**
>
> **Problem Solving**
>
> TAKE IT FURTHER
>
> the start position to the treasure.
>
> Give students directions for a treasure hunt with movements that are all perpendicular to one another (i.e, move front/back and right/ left). Have a student follow the directions to find a "treasure". Then have the class resolve the directions into two components and calculate the resultant vector. Have a student use the resultant vector to go directly from
>
> Sample Problem A An archaeologist climbs the Great Pyramid in Giza, Egypt. The pyramid's height is 136 m and its
>
> width is  $2.30 \times 10^2$  m. What is the magnitude and the direction of
>
> the displacement of the archaeologist after she has climbed from
>
> Given:
>
> Unknown:
>
> Diagram:
>
> $\Delta v = 136 \text{ m}$
>
> Choose the archaeologist's starting position
>
> as the origin of the coordinate system.
>
> d = ?
>
> $\Delta x = \frac{1}{2}$  (width) = 115 m
>
> Continued
>
> Answer: 6.4 km north
>
> **Teaching Tip**
>
> the following forms:
>
> $x = \sin^{-1} 0.5 = 30^{\circ}$
>
>
> Explain that trigonometric functions
>
> such as the one in the text, tan-1, have a
>
> different role. This is not an exponent.
>
> example, the inverse of the functions
>
> $\sin x = 0.5$  and  $\cos 3a = 0.92$  take on
>
> $3a = \cos^{-1} 0.92 \Rightarrow a = \frac{\cos^{-1} 0.92}{3} = 7.7^{\circ}$
>
> Instead, it is used to represent the inverse of a trigonometric function. For
>
> then turns and walks 7.5 m east. What single straight-line displacement could the pirate have taken to reach the treasure? 3. Emily passes a soccer ball 6.0 m directly across the field to Kara. Kara then kicks the ball as it travels between Emily and Luisa?
>
> 12 km east to his destination.
>
> a. What distance has the driver traveled? **b.** What is the driver's total displacement?
>
> the ball 14.5 m directly down the field to Luisa. What is the total displacement of 4. A hummingbird, 3.4 m above the ground, flies 1.2 m along a straight path. Upon spotting a flower below, the hummingbird drops directly downward 1.4 m to hover in front of the flower. What is the hummingbird's total displacement?
>
> and then he turns around and travels 3 km west. Finally, he turns again and travels
>
> 2. While following the directions on a treasure map, a pirate walks 45.0 m north and
>
> Finding Resultant Magnitude and Direction (continued)
>
> **ALTERNATIVE APPROACHES** To find an angle in a right triangle, you can apply different trigonometric functions, such as the following.  $\theta = \sin^{-1}\left(\frac{\Delta y}{d}\right) = \sin^{-1}\left(\frac{136}{178}\right) = 49.8^{\circ}$
>
>
> Two-Dimensional Motion and Vectors
>
> 4. 1.8 m at 49° below the horizontal
>

## **▼ Teach** continued


> **[Teaching Tip]**
>
> In mathematics, the components of a vector are called projections. The x component is the projection of the vector along the x-axis, and the y component is the projection of the vector along the y-axis.
>
> **Misconception Alert!**
>
> Because of the prominence of angles
>
> measured from the x-axis, students may
>
> develop the misconception that the x
>
> calculated using the cosine function.
>
> This misconception may be corrected by using examples on the board in which
>
> the angles are measured from the  $\gamma$ -axis.
>
> component of a vector is always
>
>

#### **Resolving Vectors into Components**

components of a vector the

of a coordinate system

FIGURE 2.6

to the around

FIGURE 2.7

**Using Vector Components** 

ne = 95 km/h

**BELOW LEVEL** 

Pythagorean theorem.

To stay beneath the biplane, the truck must be driven with a velocity equal to the

x component  $(v_x)$  of the biplane's velocity.

**Differentiated Instruction** 

and tangent functions, as well as the

Students who need a refresher on trigonometry can be directed to Appendix A, which includes a more detailed discussion of the sine, cosine,

projections of a vector along the axes

Diagramming a Movie Scene

A truck carrying a film crew must be driven

at the correct velocity to enable the crew

to film the underside of a plane. The plane

flies at 95 km/h at an angle of 20° relative

In the pyramid example, the horizontal and vertical parts that add up to give the tourist's actual displacement are called **components**. The x component is parallel to the x-axis. The y component is parallel to the y-axis. Any vector can be completely described by a set of perpendicular components.

In this textbook, components of vectors are shown as outlined, open arrows. Components have arrowheads to indicate their direction. Components are scalars (numbers), but they are signed numbers. The direction is important to determine their sign in a coordinate system.

You can often describe an object's motion more conveniently by breaking a single vector into two components, or *resolving* the vector. Resolving a vector allows you to analyze the motion in each direction.

This point is illustrated by examining a scene on the set of an action

movie. For this scene, a plane travels at 95 km/h at an angle of 20° relative

To find the velocity that the truck must maintain to stay beneath the

The sine and cosine functions are defined in terms of the lengths of

sine of an angle =

In **Figure 2.7**, the leg opposite the 20° angle represents the *y* component,  $v_y$ , which describes the vertical speed of the airplane. The hypotenuse,  $\mathbf{v_{plane'}}$  is the resultant vector that describes the airplane's total

The cosine of an angle is the ratio between the leg adjacent to that

**Definition of the Cosine Function for Right Triangles** 

cosine of an angle =

In **Figure 2.7**, the adjacent leg represents the x component,  $v_{x'}$  which describes the airplane's horizontal speed. This x component equals the speed required of the truck to remain beneath the plane. Thus, the truck

must maintain a speed of  $v_x = (\cos 20^\circ)(95 \text{ km/h}) = 90 \text{ km/h}$ .

opposite leg

the sides of such right triangles. The sine of an angle is the ratio of the leg

plane, we must know the horizontal component of the plane's velocity.

Once more, the key to solving the problem is to recognize that a right

triangle can be drawn using the plane's velocity and its x and y compo-

**Definition of the Sine Function for Right Triangles** 

nents. The situation can then be analyzed using trigonometry.

opposite that angle to the hypotenuse.

 $\sin \theta = \frac{\text{opp}}{\text{hyp}}$ 

angle and the hypotenuse.

 $\cos\theta = \frac{\text{adj}}{\text{hyp}}$ 

to the ground. Filming the plane from below, a camera team travels in a

truck directly beneath the plane at all times, as shown in Figure 2.6.

the horizontal and vertical components

of the arrow's final velocity.

PROBLEM GUIDE B

**Solving for** 

component

components

\*Challenging Problem

one

both

Use this guide to assign problems.

**PW** = Sample Problem Set I (online)

**PB** = Sample Problem Set II (online)

SE 1-2

PW Sample, 1, 3

Sample, 3–4; Ch. Rvw. 24-25

Sample, 5-10

1-4

**PW** 2-8


PB

**SE** = Student Edition Textbook

**Answer**: 41 m/s, -19 m/s

Tips and Tricks

the given angle.

Two-Dimensional Motion and Vectors

89

Don't assume that the cosine

function can always be used for the x-component and the sine

function can always be used for the *y*-component. The correct

choice of function depends on

where the given angle is located. Instead, always check to see

which component is adjacent and which component is opposite to

**Resolving Vectors** 

ANALYZE

PLAN

SOLVE

**CHECK YOUR** 

Continued

**Problem Solving** 

**ALTERNATIVE APPROACH** 

For Step 4 (Check Your Answer) students can apply the sine and cosine ratios as shown:

 $\sin \theta = \frac{v_y}{v} \Rightarrow \sin 35^\circ = \frac{54}{95} \Rightarrow 0.573 \approx 0.568$ 

 $\cos \theta = \frac{v_x}{v} \Rightarrow \cos 35^\circ = \frac{78}{95} \Rightarrow 0.819 \approx 0.821$ 

The slight difference is due to rounding.

Given:

Unknown:

Diagram:

 $\sin \theta = \frac{1}{1}$ 

Rearrange the equations to isolate the unknowns:

Substitute the values into the equations and solve:

= 54 km/h

 $v_{\nu} = 78 \text{ km/h}$ 

 $v^2 = v_r^2 + v_v^2$ 

 $9025 \approx 9000$ The slight difference is due to rounding.

Pythagorean theorem.

 $v_v = (95 \text{ km/h}) (\sin 35^\circ)$ 

 $v_{r} = (95 \text{ km/h}) (\cos 35^{\circ})$ 

helicopter's actual velocity, the components must satisfy the

 $(95)^2 = (78)^2 + (54)^2$ 

Because the components of the velocity form a right triangle with the

 $v_{\nu} = v \sin \theta$ 

 $v_{r} = v \cos \theta$ 

students to draw each vector and its components separately. Then, have them sum the components in each direction and add the summed components together to find **d.** Repeat with additional examples to help prepare students for Sample Problem C,

Resolving Vectors (continued)

Adding Vectors Algebraically.

#### **Adding Vectors Algebraically**

Sample Problem C A hiker walks 27.0 km from her base camp at 35° south of east. The next day, she walks 41.0 km in a direction 65° north of east and discovers a forest ranger's tower. Find the magnitude and direction of her resultant displacement between the base camp and the tower.

**ANALYZE** 

Select a coordinate system. Then sketch and label each vector.  $d_1 = 27.0 \text{ km}$   $\theta_1 = -35^{\circ}$ 

 $d_2 = 41.0 \text{ km}$   $\theta_2 = 65^{\circ}$ 

Find the x and y components of all vectors. Make a separate sketch of the displacements for each day. Use the cosine and sine functions to find the

Find the x and y components of the total

 $d^2 = (\Delta x_{tot})^2 + (\Delta y_{tot})^2$ 

 $\cos \theta = \frac{\Delta x}{d} \qquad \sin \theta = \frac{\Delta y}{d}$ 

 $\Delta x_1 = d_1 \cos \theta_1 = (27.0 \text{ km}) [\cos (-35^\circ)] = 22 \text{ km}$ 

 $\Delta y_1 = d_1 \sin \theta_1 = (27.0 \text{ km}) [\sin (-35^\circ)] = -15 \text{ km}$ 

 $\Delta x_2 = d_2 \cos \theta_2 = (41.0 \text{ km}) (\cos 65^\circ) = 17 \text{ km}$ 

 $\Delta y_2 = d_2 \sin \theta_2 = (41.0 \text{ km}) (\sin 65^\circ) = 37 \text{ km}$ 

 $\Delta x_{tot} = \Delta x_1 + \Delta x_2 = 22 \text{ km} + 17 \text{ km} = 39 \text{ km}$  $\Delta y_{tot} = \Delta y_1 + \Delta y_2 = -15 \text{ km} + 37 \text{ km} = 22 \text{ km}$ 

Use the Pythagorean theorem to find the magnitude of the

Use a suitable trigonometric function to find the angle.

 $\frac{d}{d} = \sqrt{(\Delta x_{tot})^2 + (\Delta y_{tot})^2} = \sqrt{(39 \text{ km})^2 + (22 \text{ km})^2} = \frac{45 \text{ km}}{100 \text{ km}}$ 

Two-Dimensional Motion and Vectors

 $\theta = \tan^{-1} \left( \frac{\Delta y_{tot}}{\Delta x_{tot}} \right) = \tan^{-1} \left( \frac{22 \text{ km}}{39 \text{ km}} \right) = \boxed{29^{\circ} \text{ north of east}}$ 

Ranger's tower Base

 $\theta_1 = -35^\circ$ 

 $d_1 = 27.0 \text{ km}$ 

 $\Delta y_1$ 

(a)

91

**Interactive** Demo

HMDScience.com

**Tips and Tricks** 

to be negative.

 $\theta_1$  is negative, because clockwise angles from the nositive y-axis are conventionally considered

PLAN

SOLVE

Continued

**Problem Solving** 

alternative approach:  $\sin(-a) = -\sin a$ cos(-a) = cos a

**ALTERNATIVE APPROACH** 

In Step 2(a), remind students that they can use the following trigonometric formulas as an

Unknown:

(a) For day 1:

**(b)** For day 2:

displacement.

resultant vector.

displacement components.

**Classroom Practice** 

**Adding Vectors Algebraically** A camper walks 4.5 km at 45° north of east then 4.5 km due south. Find the camper's total displacement.

Answer: 3.4 km at 22° south of east

and then flies 118 km at 35.0° west of

Use this guide to assign problems.

**PW** = Sample Problem Set I (online)

**PB** = Sample Problem Set II (online)

**SE** Sample, 1–3, 4\*;

PW Sample, 1-5

PB Sample, 1-10


\*Challenging Problem

Ch. Rvw. 26, 53\*

**SE** = Student Edition Textbook

PROBLEM GUIDE C

Solving for

vector

sum

A plane flies 118 km at 15.0° south of east

north. Find the magnitude and direction

of the total displacement of the plane. Answer: 81 km at 55° north of east

**4.** An airplane flying parallel to the ground undergoes two consecutive

60.0° east of north. What is the total displacement of the airplane?

**SECTION 2 FORMATIVE ASSESSMENT** 

1. Identify a convenient coordinate system for analyzing each of the

c. a submarine submerging at an angle of 30° to the horizontal

2. Find the magnitude and direction of the resultant velocity vector for the

a. a fish swimming at 3.0 m/s relative to the water across a river that

Find the vector components along the directions noted in parentheses.
 a car displaced 45° north of east by 10.0 km (north and east)

**4.** Why do nonperpendicular vectors need to be resolved into components

3. a. 7.07 km north. 7.07 km east

right triangles

**b.** 1.6 m/s<sup>2</sup> horizontal. 1.1 m/s<sup>2</sup> vertical

**4.** because the Pythagorean theorem and the

tangent function can be applied only to

**b.** a duck accelerating away from a hunter at 2.0 m/s<sup>2</sup> at an angle of 35° to

**b.** a surfer traveling at 1.0 m/s relative to the water across a wave that is

Reviewing Main Ideas

a. a dog walking along a sidewalk

following perpendicular velocities:

b. an acrobat walking along a high wire

the ground (horizontal and vertical)

before you can add the vectors together?

following situations:

moves at 5.0 m/s

Critical Thinking

**Answers to Section Assessment** 

**1. a.** x-axis: forward and backward on

 $\nu$ -axis: up and down

y-axis: up and down

intended path

wave is traveling

y-axis: left and right on sidewalk

**c.** *x*-axis: horizontal at water level

2. a. 5.8 m/s at 59° downriver from its

**b.** 6.1 m/s at 9.5° from the direction the

**b.** x-axis: forward and backward on rope

sidewalk

traveling at 6.0 m/s

displacements. The first is 75 km 30.0° west of north, and the second is 155 km

▼ Teach continued

1. 49 m at 7.3° to the right of downfield

2. 7.5 km at 26° above the horizontal

**Assess** Use the Formative Assessment on this page to evaluate student

Reteach For students who need

additional instruction, download the

**Response to Intervention** To reassess

students' mastery, use the Section Quiz,

available to print or to take directly

online at HMDScience.com.

3. 13.0 m at 57° north of east

4. 171 km at 34° east of north

▼ Assess and Reteach

mastery of the section.

Section Study Guide.


**Answers** 

Practice C


## **▼ Teach** continued


> **[Demonstration]**
>

#### **AIR RESISTANCE**

ball

Purpose Show the effects of air resistance on the flight of a projectile.

Materials rubber stopper, table-tennis

**Procedure** Toss the stopper at an angle

of 45°. Have students note the trajec-

tory. Sketch the parabolic path on the chalkboard. Throw the table-tennis ball

at an angle of 45°. Have students note

the trajectory. Sketch its path on the

chalkboard. Have students compare the

two trajectories. Students should note

that the path of the table-tennis ball is

not symmetrical but has a steeper

air resistance.


descent, demonstrating the effect of

#### FIGURE 3.

#### Air Resistance Affects Projectile

**Motion** (a) Without air resistance, the soccer ball would travel along a parabola. (b) With air resistance, the soccer ball would travel along a shorter path.

projectile motion the curved path

that an object follows when thrown,

launched, or otherwise projected

near the surface of Earth

Did YOU Know?

The greatest distance a regulation-size

**Differentiated Instruction** 

Review the general equation for a parabola,

the board for clarity. Visual learners will

benefit from time-lapse photography of a projectile in motion. Or consider using the classroom sink and a strobe light to illustrate the movement of water drops. You could begin by starting a slow drip from the faucet, darkening the room, and setting the strobe light up so that it shines through the drops.

 $y = ax^2 + bx + c$ , and illustrate a parabola on

**INCLUSION** 

baseball has ever been thrown is 135.9 m, by Glen Gorbous in 1957.

In this section, we will focus on the form of two-dimensional motion called **projectile motion**. Objects that are thrown or launched into the air

and are subject to gravity are called projectiles. Some examples of projec-

tiles are softballs, footballs, and arrows when they are projected through

Figure 3.3(a). Many people mistakenly think that projectiles eventually fall

straight down in much the same way that a cartoon character does after running off a cliff. But if an object has an initial horizontal velocity, there

will be horizontal motion throughout the flight of the projectile. Note that

velocity of projectiles will be considered constant. This velocity would not

be constant if we accounted for air resistance. With air resistance, projectiles slow down as they collide with air particles, as shown in Figure 3.3(b).

on the following page. The red ball was dropped at the same instant the

First, consider the red ball that falls straight down. It has no motion in the horizontal direction. In the vertical direction, it starts from rest ( $v_{y,i}=0~\text{m/s}$ ) and proceeds in free fall. Thus, the kinematic equations from the chapter "Motion in One Dimension" can be applied to analyze the vertical motion of the falling ball, as shown on the next page. Note that on Earth's surface the acceleration ( $a_y$ ) will equal -g ( $-9.81~\text{m/s}^2$ ) because the only vertical component of acceleration is free-fall acceleration. Note

Using your fingers or a stick, manipulate the water so that it arcs downward. This is only

part of the parabola but students may be able

to get the general idea of what occurs when a

projectile passes through part of a parabola.

yellow ball was launched horizontally. If air resistance is disregarded, both balls hit the ground at the same time. By examining each ball's position in relation to the horizontal lines and to one another, we see that the two balls fall at the same rate. This may seem impossible because one is given an initial velocity and the other begins from rest. But if the motion is analyzed one component at a time, it makes sense.

for the purposes of samples and exercises in this book, the horizontal

Projectile motion is free fall with an initial horizontal velocity.

To understand the motion a projectile undergoes, first examine Figure 3.4

the air. Even a long jumper can be considered a projectile.

The path of a projectile is a curve called a parabola, as shown in

Projectiles follow parabolic trajectories.

also that  $\Delta y$  is negative.

 $\Delta x = v_r \Delta t$ 

Next consider the initial motion of the launched yellow ball in

Figure 3.4. Despite having an initial horizontal velocity, the launched ball

has no initial velocity in the vertical direction. Just like the red ball that

falls straight down, the launched yellow ball is in free fall. The vertical motion of the launched yellow ball is described by the same free-fall

equations. In any time interval, the launched ball undergoes the same

both balls reach the ground at the same time.

function to find the direction of the velocity.

Quick LAB

same time?

**PRE-AP** 

Roll a ball off a table. At the

instant the rolling ball leaves the

same height above the floor. Do

the two balls hit the floor at the

table, drop a second ball from the

Try varying the speed at which

Explain that the horizontal motion of a projectile is independent of its vertical motion. Have students manipulate the equations given in the text to show that both equations are dependent on  $\Delta t$ . In other words, show that the the vertical component has no effect on the horizontal motion and that the horizontal component has no effect

you roll the first ball off the table.

Does varying the speed affect

on the vertical motion.

ORichard Megna/Fundamental Photographs, New York;

vertical displacement as the ball that falls straight down. For this reason,

To find the velocity of a projectile at any point during its flight, find the vector that has the known components. Specifically, use the Pythagorean theorem to find the magnitude of the velocity, and use the tangent

**PROJECTILE MOTION** 

situation?

whether the two balls strike the

one of the balls down a slope.

Drop the other ball from the base

of the slope at the instant the first

balls hits the ground first in this

ball leaves the slope. Which of the

ground at the same time? Next roll

**MATERIALS** 

• 2 identical balls

Perform this experiment

away from walls and

furniture that can be

damaged

Two-Dimensional Motion and Vectors

slope or ramp

leaves the table is tricky. Students

should try this several times in order to

get the timing right. Holding the second

ball just past the edge of the table and

near the path of the first ball works well.

You should point out the limitations of

Two-Dimensional Motion and Vectors

this QuickLab because of human

reaction time.

#### Projectiles Launched Horizontally (continued)

#### **Practice**

velocity.

initial velocity.

**REALITY CHECK** 

Students often memorize equations without

Encourage students to visualize how each of these equations is a form of one of the kinematic equations they learned earlier. Explain that solving projectile problems is done by applying the kinematic equations

taking the time to understand them.

separately in each direction.

- 1. A baseball rolls off a 0.70 m high desk and strikes the floor 0.25 m away from the base of the desk. How fast was the ball rolling?
- 2. A cat chases a mouse across a 1.0 m high table. The mouse steps out of the way, and the cat slides off the table and strikes the floor 2.2 m from the edge of the table. When the cat slid off the table, what was its speed?
- **3.** A pelican flying along a horizontal path drops a fish from a height of 4 m. The fish travels 8.0 m horizontally before it hits the water below. What is the pelican's speed?

**4.** If the pelican in item 3 was traveling at the same speed but was only 2.7 m above the water, how far would the fish travel horizontally before hitting the water

Use components to analyze objects launched at an angle.

Let us examine a case in which a projectile is launched at an angle to the

Suppose the initial velocity vector makes an angle  $\boldsymbol{\theta}$  with the horizontal.

horizontal, as shown in Figure 3.5. The projectile has an initial vertical

component of velocity as well as a horizontal component of velocity.

Again, to analyze the motion of such a projectile, you must resolve the

initial velocity vector into its components. The sine and cosine functions

can be used to find the horizontal and vertical components of the initial

 $v_{x,i} = v_i \cos \theta$  and  $v_{y,i} = v_i \sin \theta$ 

We can substitute these values for  $v_{x,i}$  and  $v_{y,i}$  into the kinematic equations to obtain a set of equations that can be used to analyze the

$$\begin{split} v_x &= v_{x,i} = v_i \cos \theta = \text{constant} \\ \Delta x &= (v_i \cos \theta) \Delta t \\ v_{y,f} &= v_i \sin \theta + a_y \Delta t \\ v_{y,f}^2 &= v_i^2 (\sin \theta)^2 + 2a_y \Delta y \\ \Delta y &= (v_i \sin \theta) \Delta t + \frac{1}{2} a_y (\Delta t)^2 \end{split}$$

As we have seen, the velocity of a projectile launched at an angle to the ground has both horizontal and vertical components. The vertical motion is similar to that of an object that is thrown straight up with an

motion of a projectile launched at an angle.

**Projectiles Launched at an Angle** 

#### **Answers**

#### **Practice D**

- **1.** 0.66 m/s
- **2.** 4.9 m/s
- **3.** 7.6 m/s

initial velocity.

**TEACH FROM VISUALS** 

**FIGURE 3.5** Point out to students that from the time immediately after firing until it hits the ground, the projectile

follows a parabolic path. Emphasize that

the vector  $\mathbf{v}$  does not represent any

part of the path of the projectile but

Ask What is the acceleration of a

other time during the flight

only the direction and magnitude of its

projectile just before it hits the ground?

**Answer**:  $-9.81 \text{ m/s}^2$ , the same as at any

Two-Dimensional Motion and Vectors

**4.** 5.6 m

**Components of Initial Velocity** 

velocity,  $\mathbf{v}_{i}$ , at an angle of  $\theta$ . Resolve the

initial velocity into its x and y components.

Then, the kinematic equations can be

applied to describe the motion of the

projectile throughout its flight.

Two-Dimensional Motion and Vectors

97

An object is projected with an initial

3 SOLVE

**Problem Solving** 

**ALTERNATIVE APPROACHES** 

Point out that there are different ways to

horizontal distance given (4.0 m).

solve comparison questions such as item 1 in Practice E. In this case, one option is to solve for  $\Delta y$  and then compare the calculated value of  $\Delta y$  with the vertical distance given (2.5 m). Another option is to solve for  $\Delta x$  and compare the calculated value of  $\Delta x$  with the

Choose a kinematic equation to solve for time.

 $\Delta x = (v_i \cos \theta) \Delta t$ 

Find out how far each object will fall during this time.

Find the final height of both the banana and the dart.

4.77 m above the ground

4.76 m above the ground

The dart hits the banana. The slight difference is due to rounding.

Use the free-fall kinematic equation. For the banana,  $v_i = 0$ . Thus:

 $\Delta y_b = \frac{1}{2} a_y (\Delta t)^2 = \frac{1}{2} (-9.81 \text{ m/s}^2)(0.215 \text{ s})^2 = -0.227 \text{ m}$ 

The dart has an initial vertical component of velocity of  $v_i \sin \theta_i$  so:

 $\Delta y_d = (v_i \sin \theta) \Delta t + \frac{1}{2} a_v (\Delta t)^2$ 

 $\Delta y_d = 3.99 \text{ m} - 0.227 \text{ m} = 3.76 \text{ m}$ 

 $\Delta y_d = (50.0 \text{ m/s})(\sin 21.8^\circ)(0.215 \text{ s}) + \frac{1}{2}(-9.81 \text{ m/s}^2)(0.215 \text{ s})^2$ 

 $y_{dart, f} = y_{d,i} + \Delta y_d = 1.00 \text{ m} + 3.76 \text{ m} =$ 

 $y_{banana, f} = y_{b,i} + \Delta y_b = 5.00 \text{ m} + (-0.227 \text{ m}) =$ 

Continued

Rearrange the equation for motion along the *x*-axis to isolate  $\Delta t$ , the unknown, the time the dart takes to travel the horizontal distance.

 $\Delta t = \frac{\Delta x}{v_i \cos \theta} = \frac{10.0 \text{ m}}{(50.0 \text{ m/s})(\cos 21.8^\circ)} = 0.215 \text{ s}$ 

quadratic equations.)

**Answer**:  $1.7 \times 10^2$  m

**Solving for:** 

 $\Delta t$ 

A

98


 $\Delta y/\Delta x$  SE

PROBLEM GUIDE E

Use this guide to assign problems.

**PB** = Sample Problem Set II (online)

**PW** 4b, 5, 7–8

4; Ch. Rvw.

**PW** Sample, 1–3, 4a

Ch. Rvw. 34b,

47\*b, 55b, 62b

Ch. Rvw. 47c\*.

Sample, 1-5

8, 10

7.9

48b

PB


PB

\*Challenging Problem

47a\*, 48a, 49\*, 56a, 61

Sample, 1–3:

Ch. Rvw. 34a.

35-36, 55a, 56b, 59-60, 62a, 62c

SE = Student Edition Textbook **PW** = Sample Problem Set I (online)

#### **SECTION 1 Introduction to Vectors**

- A scalar is a quantity completely specified by only a number with appropriate units, whereas a vector is a quantity that has magnitude and direction.
- · Vectors can be added graphically using the triangle method of addition, in which the tail of one vector is placed at the head of the other. The resultant is the vector drawn from the tail of the first vector to the head of the last

Any vector can be resolved into its component vectors by using the sine

Neglecting air resistance, a projectile has a constant horizontal velocity and

 If the frame of reference is denoted with subscripts (v<sub>ab</sub> is the velocity of object or frame a with respect to object or frame b), then the velocity of an object with respect to a different frame of reference can be found by adding the known velocities so that the subscript starts with the letter that ends

If the order of the subscripts is reversed, there is a change in sign; for

**VARIABLE SYMBOLS** 

Units

m

m/s

m/s<sup>2</sup>

m

m

meters /second

meters/second2

meters

meters

In the absence of air resistance, projectiles follow a parabolic path.

**CHAPTER SUMMARY** 

Ask students to prepare a concept map for the chapter. The concept map

should include most of the vocabulary

terms, along with other integral terms


**Teaching Tip** 

or concepts.

vector resultant

scalar

KEY TERM

**KEY TERM** 

**Problem Solving** 

See Appendix D: Equations for a summary of the equations introduced in this chapter. If you need more problem-solving practice, see **Appendix I: Additional Problems.** 

Chapter Summary

107

projectile motion

**DIAGRAM SYMBOLS** 

displacement vector

acceleration vector

velocity vector

resultant vector

component

components of a vector

