---
chapter: 3
chapter_title: Two-Dimensional Motion and Vectors
section: 2
section_title: SECTION 2 Vector Operations
---

#### **SECTION 2 Vector Operations**

SECTION 3 Projectile Motion

SECTION 4 Relative Motion

a constant downward free-fall acceleration.

the preceding velocity subscript:  $\mathbf{v}_{ac} = \mathbf{v}_{ab} + \mathbf{v}_{bc}$ .

displacement

acceleration

horizontal component

vertical component

velocity

and cosine functions.

example,  $\mathbf{v}_{cd} = -\mathbf{v}_{dc}$ .

Quantities

d (vector)

v (vector)

a (vector)

 $\Delta x$  (scalar)

 $\Delta v$  (scalar)

• The Pythagorean theorem and the inverse tangent function can be used to find the magnitude and direction of a resultant vector.

 6. Vector **A** is 3.00 units in length and points along the positive *x*-axis. Vector **B** is 4.00 units in length and points along the negative *y*-axis. Use graphical methods to find the magnitude and direction of the

CONCEPTUAL QUESTIONS

be correct.

Explain your reasoning.

 10. If **B** is added to **A,** under what conditions does the resultant have the magnitude equal to *A* + *B*? 11. Give an example of a moving object that has a

 13. If a set of vectors laid head to tail forms a closed polygon, the resultant is zero. Is this statement true?

velocity vector and an acceleration vector in the same direction and an example of one that has velocity and acceleration vectors in opposite directions. 12. A student accurately uses the method for combining vectors. The two vectors she combines have magnitudes of 55 and 25 units. The answer that she gets is either 85, 20, or 55. Pick the correct answer, and explain why it is the only one of the three that can

 7. Each of the displacement vectors **A** and **B** shown in the figure below has a magnitude of 3.00 m.

Graphically find the following:

following vectors: a. A + B b. A − B c. A + 2B d. B − A

positive *x*-axis

positive *x*-axis

**8.** 7.9 m at 4.3° north of west **9.** 15.3 m at 58.4° south of east

*x*-axis

direction

30 units

**108 Chapter 3**

slowing down

vector is zero.

the positive *x*-axis **7. a.** 5.20 m at 60.0° above the positive *x-*axis

**b.** 3.00 m at 30.0° below the

**d.** 5.00 units at 127° clockwise from

**c.** 3.00 m at 150° counterclockwise from the positive *x*-axis

**d.** 5.20 m at 60.0° below the positive

**10.** when the vectors point in the same

**11.** a car moving straight and speeding up, a car moving straight and

**12.** 55; the maximum value of the vector sum is 80 units, the minimum value is

**13.** Yes, the distance from the tail of the first vector to the head of the last

a. A + B b. A − B c. B − A d. A − 2B


Spec. Number PH 99 PE C03-CHR-005-A

Boston Graphics, Inc. 617.523.1333

**C HAPTER RE V IEW**

Two-Dimensional Motion and Vectors **109**

## **C HAPTER RE V IEW**

- **32.** 3.3 s; 36 m/s
- **33.** 11 m
- **34. a.** 2.77 × 105 m
  - **b.** 284 s
- **35. a.** clears the goal by 1 m

they are measured.

**38.** Displacement and velocity depend on the frame of reference in which

**42. a.** To the passenger, the ball appears to move in a straight line. To an outside observer, the ball moves along a parabolic trajectory. **b.** The passenger would see the ball move backward, while the stationary observer would see no

change from part (a).

**39.** the coordinate system used to describe the motion

- **b.** falling
- **36.** 4.11 m

**40.**Earth

**41. a.** 70 m/s east **b.** 20 m/s

**110 Chapter 3**

**37.** 80 m; 210 m

the waterfall?

For problems 34 –37, see Sample Problem E.

Neglecting air resistance, find a. the shell's horizontal range

clearing the crossbar?

rising or while falling?


 32. A person standing at the edge of a seaside cliff kicks a stone over the edge with a speed of 18 m/s. The cliff is 52 m above the water's surface, as shown at right. How long does it take for the stone to fall to the water? With what speed does it strike the water?

 33. A spy in a speed boat is being chased down a river by government officials in a faster craft. Just as the officials' boat pulls up next to the spy's boat, both

 34. A shell is fired from the ground with an initial speed of 1.70 × 103 m/s (approximately five times the speed of sound) at an initial angle of 55.0° to the horizontal.

b. the amount of time the shell is in motion 35. A place kicker must kick a football from a point 36.0 m (about 40.0 yd) from the goal. As a result of the kick, the ball must clear the crossbar, which is 3.05 m high. When kicked, the ball leaves the ground with a speed of 20.0 m/s at an angle of 53° to the horizontal. a. By how much does the ball clear or fall short of

b. Does the ball approach the crossbar while still

 36. When a water gun is fired while being held horizontally at a height of 1.00 m above ground level, the water travels a horizontal distance of 5.00 m. A child, who is holding the same gun in a horizontal position, is also sliding down a 45.0° incline at a constant speed of 2.00 m/s. If the child fires the gun when it is 1.00 m above the ground and the water takes 0.329 s to reach the ground, how far will the water travel horizontally?

boats reach the edge of a 5.0 m waterfall. If the spy's speed is 15 m/s and the officials' speed is 26 m/s, how far apart will the two vessels be when they land below

 37. A ship maneuvers to within 2.50 × 103 m of an island's 1.80 × 103 m high mountain peak and fires a projectile at an enemy ship 6.10 × 102 m on the other side of the peak, as illustrated below. If the ship shoots the projectile with an initial velocity of 2.50 × 102 m/s at an angle of 75.0°, how close to the enemy ship does the projectile land? How close (vertically) does the projectile come to the peak?

6.10 × 102m 2.50 × <sup>10</sup>3m

38. Explain the statement "All motion is relative."

40. When we describe motion, what is a common frame

 41. A small airplane is flying at 50 m/s toward the east. A wind of 20 m/s toward the east suddenly begins to blow and gives the plane a velocity of 70 m/s east. a. Which vector is the resultant vector? b. What is the magnitude of the wind velocity? 42. A ball is thrown upward in the air by a passenger on a train that is moving with constant velocity. a. Describe the path of the ball as seen by the passenger. Describe the path as seen by a stationary observer outside the train. b. How would these observations change if the train

were accelerating along the track?

 43. A river flows due east at 1.50 m/s. A boat crosses the river from the south shore to the north shore by maintaining a constant velocity of 10.0 m/s due north

a. What is the velocity of the boat as viewed by an

b. If the river is 325 m wide, how far downstream is the boat when it reaches the north shore?

For problems 43–46, see Sample Problem F.

Relative Motion REVIEWING MAIN IDEAS

39. What is a frame of reference?

of reference?

PRACTICE PROBLEMS

relative to the water.

observer on shore?

53. The eye of a hurricane passes over Grand Bahama

Island. It is moving in a direction 60.0° north of west

with a speed of 41.0 km/h. Exactly three hours later, the course of the hurricane shifts due north, and its

speed slows to 25.0 km/h, as shown below. How far

from Grand Bahama is the hurricane 4.50 h after it

**54.** A boat moves through a river at 7.5 m/s relative to the

the river is flowing at  $1.5~\rm m/s$ , how long does it take the boat to make a roundtrip consisting of a 250 m displacement downstream followed by a 250 m

water, regardless of the boat's direction. If the water in

25.0 km/h

41.0 km/h

Chapter Review

111

passes over the island?

displacement upstream?

**48.a.** 15 m/s

49.10.5 m/s

**50. a.** 22.2 s

**52.** 22.5 s

**53.** 157 km

**54.**  $7.0 \times 10^{1}$  s

**51. a.** 2.66 m/s

**b.** 0.64 m

**b.** 15 m/s

**b.**  $2.00 \times 10^2$  s


clears a wall 21.0 m high located 130.0 m from

a. What is the initial speed of the ball?

of the ball when it reaches the wall.

drives a car up a 15° incline.

48. A daredevil jumps a canyon 12 m wide. To do so, he

**b.** If the daredevil jumps at this minimum speed,

what will his speed be when he reaches the

49. A 2.00 m tall basketball player attempts a goal 10.00 m from the basket (3.05 m high). If he shoots the ball at a 45.0° angle, at what initial speed must he throw the

basketball so that it goes through the hoop without

the wall?

canyon?

other side?

striking the backboard?

home plate. The ball is hit at an angle of 35.0° to the

horizontal, and air resistance is negligible. Assume

the ball is hit at a height of 1.0 m above the ground.

b. How much time does it take for the ball to reach

c. Find the components of the velocity and the speed

a. What minimum speed must he achieve to clear the

**C HAPTER RE V IEW**

**112 Chapter 3**

