---
chapter: 3
chapter_title: Two-Dimensional Motion and Vectors
section: 4
section_title: SECTION 4
---

#### **SECTION 4**

## **▼ Plan and Prepare**


> **[Preview Vocabulary]**
>
> **Visual Vocabulary** Ask students to imagine a person walking inside a moving train. Then ask students to imagine another person outside the train who is moving faster than the person inside. Let students brainstorm descriptions
>
> of how the two people perceive each
>
> other's motions . Then explain that in
>
> such scenarios where a combination
>
> called relative velocity, in which the
>
> velocity of one object is compared
>
> relative to the velocity of another
>
> **FIGURE 4.1** Tell students that this diagram shows what would happen
>
> motion has the dominant effect on the
>
> trajectory.)
>
>
> if there were no air resistance. **Ask** How would the two diagrams change if air resistance were included? **Answer:** In the first diagram, the object would appear to fall down and backward as viewed by the pilot. In the second diagram, the object would follow a shortened path as viewed by the observer on the ground. (At any instant after release, both the *x*-component and the *y*-component would be smaller, but the suppression of horizontal
>
> **TEACH FROM VISUALS**
>
> object.
>
> **▼** Teach
>
> of velocities is involved, we use a term
>
>

#### **Objectives**

Describe situations in terms of frame of reference.

Solve problems involving relative velocity.

FIGURE 4.1

projectile path.

(a)

Frames of Reference When

viewed from the plane (a), the stunt dummy (represented by the maroon dot)

the stunt dummy follows a parabolic

falls straight down. When viewed from a stationary position on the ground **(b)**,

**Differentiated Instruction** 

Matching one moving object with another moving object can help visual learners

understand relative velocity. Put a list of

on the board. Ask students to name some

a person swimming in the water.

moving objects that can be paired with one of the examples in order to establish a case for relative velocity. For example, students can match the motion of a moving boat with

moving objects such as the ones to the right

**INCLUSION** 

# **Relative Motion**

#### **Frames of Reference**

features of the motion.

If you are moving at 80 km/h north and a car passes you going 90 km/h north, to you the faster car seems to be moving north at  $10 \, \text{km/h}$ . Someone standing on the side of the road would measure the velocity of the faster car as  $90 \, \text{km/h}$  north. This simple example demonstrates that velocity measurements depend on the frame of reference of the observer.

Velocity measurements differ in different frames of reference.

Observers using different frames of reference may measure different displacements or velocities for an object in motion. That is, two observers

moving with respect to each other would generally not agree on some

Consider a stunt dummy that is dropped from an airplane flying horizontally over Earth with a constant velocity. As shown in Figure 4.1(a),

a passenger on the airplane would describe the motion of the dummy as

a straight line toward Earth. An observer on the ground would view the

trajectory of the dummy as that of a projectile, as shown in Figure 4.1(b). Relative to the ground, the dummy would have a vertical component of

velocity (resulting from free-fall acceleration and equal to the velocity

move horizontally with the same velocity, the dummy would enter the

swimming pool directly beneath the airplane (assuming negligible air

Examples:

1. moving boat

2. moving elevator

3. motion of a planet in the Solar System

4. walking passenger in a train

5. rolling of a ball bearing

measured by the observer in the airplane) *and* a horizontal component of velocity given to it by the airplane's motion. If the airplane continued to

#### Relative Velocity (continued)

- 1. A passenger at the rear of a train traveling at 15 m/s relative to Earth throws a baseball with a speed of 15 m/s in the direction opposite the motion of the train. What is the velocity of the baseball relative to Earth as it leaves the thrower's hand?
- 2. A spy runs from the front to the back of an aircraft carrier at a velocity of 3.5 m/s. If the aircraft carrier is moving forward at 18.0 m/s, how fast does the spy appear to be running when viewed by an observer on a nearby stationary submarine?
- 3. A ferry is crossing a river. If the ferry is headed due north with a speed of 2.5 m/s relative to the water and the river's velocity is 3.0 m/s to the east, what will the boat's velocity relative to Earth be? (Hint: Remember to include the direction in describing the velocity.)
- 4. A pet-store supply truck moves at 25.0 m/s north along a highway. Inside, a dog moves at 1.75 m/s at an angle of 35.0° east of north. What is the velocity of the dog relative to the road?


> **[Formative Assessment]**
>

#### Reviewing Main Ideas

- 1. A woman on a 10-speed bicycle travels at 9 m/s relative to the ground as she passes a little boy on a tricycle going in the opposite direction. If the boy is traveling at 1 m/s relative to the ground, how fast does the boy appear to be moving relative to the woman?
- 2. A girl at an airport rolls a ball north on a moving walkway that moves east. If the ball's speed with respect to the walkway is 0.15 m/s and the walkway moves at a speed of 1.50 m/s, what is the velocity of the ball relative to the ground?

#### Critical Thinking

- 3. Describe the motion of the following objects if they are observed from the stated frames of reference:
  - a. a person standing on a platform viewed from a train traveling north
  - b. a train traveling north viewed by a person standing on a platform
  - c. a ball dropped by a boy walking at a speed of 1 m/s viewed by the boy
  - d. a ball dropped by a boy walking 1 m/s as seen by a nearby viewer who is stationary


> **[Answers to Section Assessment]**
>
>
> - **1.** 10 m/s (in the opposite direction)
> - **2.** 1.51 m/s at 5.7° north of east
> - **3. a.** south with a speed equal to the train's speed
> - **b.** moves north
> - **c.** appears to fall straight down
> - **d.** moves in a parabola
>

#### **PROBLEM guide F**

Use this guide to assign problems.

**SE** = Student Edition Textbook

**PW** = Sample Problem Set I (online)

**PB** = Sample Problem Set II (online)

#### **Solving for:**

| v, θ                 | SE | Sample, 1–4;<br>Ch. Rvw. 43a,<br>44a–b, 46a–b,<br>57a–b |
|----------------------|----|---------------------------------------------------------|
|                      | PW | Sample 1                                                |
|                      | PB | 7, 10                                                   |
| ∆t                   | SE | Ch. Rvw. 45,<br>50a–b, 52, 54, 58                       |
|                      | PW | 2, 4, 6                                                 |
|                      | PB | Sample, 1–5                                             |
| ∆y/∆x                | SE | Ch. Rvw. 43b                                            |
|                      | PW | 5                                                       |
|                      | PB | 6, 8–9                                                  |
| *Challenging Problem |    |                                                         |

## **Answers**

#### **Practice F**

- **1.** 0 m/s
- **2.** 14.5 m/s (in the direction that the aircraft carrier is moving)
- **3.** 3.90 m/s at (4.0 × 101 )° north of east
- **4.** 26.4 m/s at 2.17° east of north

## **Assess and Reteach**

**Assess** Use the Formative Assessment on this page to evaluate student mastery of the section.

**Reteach** For students who need additional instruction, download the Section Study Guide.

**Response to Intervention** To reassess students' mastery, use the Section Quiz, available to print or to take directly online at **HMDScience.com**.

## PHYSICS ON THE EDGE


> **[Teaching Tip]**
>
> This feature builds on the feature "Special Relativity and Time Dilation." In that feature, the assumption that the speed of light is the same for all observers was used to explain why time measurements depend on an observer's frame of reference. In this feature, this assumption and its consequences are discussed in greater detail.
>
> The feature begins by comparing the behavior of light with a typical case to show how the two differ. Next, the need to revise the classical addition of velocities is discussed. Finally, Einstein's relativistic addition of velocities is introduced, along with a discussion of how all cases are covered with this equation.
>
> Today, there is overwhelming physical evidence that the speed of light is absolute. Experiments in particle accelerators, in which particles reach speeds very close to c, support the relativistic rather than the classical addition of velocities.
>
> **[Teaching Tip]**
>
> The constancy of the speed of light is difficult for some students to grasp, because we have no direct experience of this phenomenon. Use examples to familiarize your students with Einstein's theory of the constancy of the speed of light. For example, ask students to compare the speed of sound and light waves as viewed by two different observers, one at rest and one moving toward the source of the waves.
>
> **PHYSICS ON THE EDGE**
>

# **Special Relativity** and Velocities

In the chapter "Two-Dimensional Motion and Vectors," you learned that velocity measurements are not absolute; every velocity measurement depends on the frame of reference of the observer with respect to the moving object. For example, imagine that someone riding a bike toward you at 25 m/s ( $\nu$ ) throws a softball toward you. If the bicyclist measures the softball's speed (u') to be 15 m/s, you would perceive the ball to be moving toward you at 40 m/s (u) because you have a different frame of reference than the bicyclist does. This is expressed mathematically by the equation u = v + u', which is also known as the classical addition of velocities.

#### **Nothing Can Travel Faster** Than the Speed of Light

According to Einstein's relativistic equation for the addition of velocities. material particles can never reach the speed of light.

#### The Speed of Light

As stated in the feature "Special Relativity and Time Dilation," according to Einstein's special theory of relativity, the speed of light is absolute, or independent of all frames of reference. If, instead of a softball, the bicyclist were to shine a beam of light toward you, both you and the bicyclist would measure the light's speed as  $3.0 \times 10^8$  m/s. This would remain true even if the bicyclist were moving toward you at 99 percent of the speed of light. Thus, Einstein's theory requires a different approach to the addition of velocities. Einstein's modification of the classical formula, which he derived in his 1905 paper on special relativity, covers both the case of the softball and the case of the light beam.

$$u = \frac{v + u'}{1 + (vu'/c^2)}$$

In the equation, u is the velocity of an object in a reference frame, u' is the velocity of the same object in another reference frame, v is the velocity of one reference frame relative to another, and *c* is the speed of light.

#### The Universality of Einstein's Equation

How does Einstein's equation cover both cases? First we shall consider the bicyclist throwing a softball. Because  $c^2$  is such a large number, the  $vu'/c^2$ term in the denominator is very small for velocities typical of our everyday experience. As a result, the denominator of the equation is essentially equal to 1. Hence, for speeds that are small compared with c, the two theories give nearly the same result, u = v + u', and the classical addition of velocities can be used.

However, when speeds approach the speed of light,  $vu'/c^2$  increases, and the denominator becomes greater than 1 but never more than 2.



When this occurs, the difference between the two theories becomes significant. For example, if a bicyclist moving toward you at 80 percent of the speed of light were to throw a ball to you at 70 percent of the speed of light, you would observe the ball moving toward you at about 96 percent of the speed of light rather than the 150 percent of the speed of light predicted by classical theory. In this case, the difference between the velocities predicted by each theory cannot be ignored, and the relativistic addition of velocities must be used.

In this last example, it is significant that classical addition predicts a speed greater than the speed of light (1.5c), while the relativistic addition predicts a speed less than the speed of light (0.96c). In fact, no matter how close the speeds involved are to the speed of light, the relativistic equation yields a result less than the speed of light, as seen in Figure 2.

How does Einstein's equation cover the second case, in which the bicyclist shines a beam of light toward you? Einstein's equation predicts that any object traveling at the speed of light (u'=c) will appear to travel at the speed of light (u = c) for an observer in any reference frame:

$$u = \frac{v + u'}{1 + (vu'/c^2)} = \frac{v + c}{1 + (vc/c^2)} = \frac{v + c}{1 + (v/c)} = \frac{v + c}{(c + v)/c} = c$$

This corresponds with our earlier statement that the bicyclist measures the beam of light traveling at the same speed that you do,  $3.0 \times 10^8$  m/s, even though you have a different reference frame than the bicyclist does. This occurs regardless of how fast the bicycle is moving because v (the bicycle's speed) cancels from the equation. Thus, Einstein's relativistic equation successfully covers both cases. So, Einstein's equation is a more general case of the classical equation, which is simply the limiting case.

#### FIGURE 2

| CLASSICAL AND RELATIVISTIC ADDITION OF VELOCITIES |                           |                          |                          |  |
|---------------------------------------------------|---------------------------|--------------------------|--------------------------|--|
| c = 299 792 458 m/s                               |                           | Classical addition       | Relativistic addition    |  |
| Speed between frames $(v)$                        | Speed measured in $A(u')$ | Speed measured in $B(u)$ | Speed measured in $B(u)$ |  |
| 25 m/s                                            | 15 m/s                    | 40 m/s                   | 40 m/s                   |  |
| 100 000 m/s                                       | 100 000 m/s               | 200 000 m/s              | 200 000 m/s              |  |
| 50% of <i>c</i>                                   | 50% of <i>c</i>           | 299 792 458 m/s          | 239 833 966 m/s          |  |
| 90% of <i>c</i>                                   | 90% of <i>c</i>           | 539 626 424 m/s          | 298 136 146 m/s          |  |
| 99.99% of <i>c</i>                                | 99.99% of <i>c</i>        | 599 524 958 m/s          | 299 792 457 m/s          |  |
|                                                   |                           |                          |                          |  |

CLASSICAL AND RELATIVISTIC ADDITION OF VELOCITIES

Two-Dimensional Motion and Vectors

#### **Extension**

- Have students research particleaccelerator experiments involving particles traveling at speeds close to c. Their reports should include a discussion of how observations support the relativistic addition of velocities.
- The ether was originally conceived as the medium through which light waves traveled. Have students investigate the concept of the ether and the Michelson-Morley experiment, which was intended to detect the ether. Then have a class discussion about why the concept of the ether was originally believed to be necessary and how the Michelson-Morley experiment and the special theory of relativity affected the theory of the ether.

#### **CAREERS IN PHYSICS**

## **Kinesiologist**

Lisa Griffin was born in Toronto, Canada, and grew up in a small town in Ontario. Griffin says that she has always been interested in "the nature of reality and the relationship between the mind and the body." As a high school student visiting her public library, she first learned that the link between the mind and the body was the central nervous system (CNS). As an undergraduate at the University of Guelph, she was inspired by Dr. John Brooke, who taught that the spinal cord is also part of the brain and has its own forms of "thinking" and memory.

## **CAREERS IN PHYSICS**

## **Kinesiologist**

ow does the body move? This question is just one of the many that kinesiology continually asks. To learn more about kinesiology as a career, read the interview with Lisa Griffin, who teaches in the Department of Kinesiology and Health Education at the University of Texas at Austin.

#### What training did you receive in order to become a kinesiologist?

I received a B.Sc. degree in human kinetics with a minor in biochemistry and M.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees in neuroscience. Kinesiology typically covers motor control, biomechanics, and exercise physiology. People who work in these branches are known as neuroscientists, biomechanists, and physiologists, respectively.

#### What makes kinesiology interesting to you?

The field of kinesiology allows me to explore how the central nervous system (CNS) controls human movement. Thus we work with people, and the findings of our work can be used to help others.

#### What is the nature of your research?

We record force output and single motor unit firing patterns from the muscles of human participants during fatigue and training. We then use these frequency patterns to stimulate their hands artificially with electrical stimulation. We are working toward developing an electrical stimulation system that people with paralysis could use to generate limb movement. This could help many who have spinal cord injuries from accidents or brain damage from stroke.

#### How does your work address twodimensional motion and vectors?

I investigate motor unit firing frequencies required to generate force output from muscle over time. Thus we record muscle contraction with strain gauge force transducers, bridge amplifiers, an analog to digital converter,

Lisa Griffin applies an electrical stimulus to a nerve in a patient's wrist. This experiment tested the best patterns of stimulation to recreate movement in paralyzed hands.

and a computer data acquisition and analysis program. For example, the muscles of the thumb produce force in both x and y directions. We record the x and y forces on two different channels, and then we calculate the resultant force online so that we can view the net output during contraction.

#### What are your most and least favorite things about your work?

My favorite thing is coming up with new ideas and working with students who are excited about their work. The thing I would most like to change is the amount

of time it takes to get the results of the experiments after you think of the ideas.

What advice would you offer to students who are interested in this field?

Do not underestimate the depth of the questions that can be addressed with human participants.

Lisa Griffin

106

#### **Summary** CHAPTER 3

