---
chapter: 4
chapter_title: Forces and the Laws of Motion
section: 1
section_title: SECTION 1
---

# CHAPTER 4 Instruction and Intervention Support

## Forces and the Laws of Motion

Interactive Whiteboard activities, and Visual Concepts.

Visual Concepts: Force • Comparing Contact and

Visual Concepts: Newton's First Law • Net External

Teaching Visuals: Determining Net Force • Inertia

Textbook: Newton's Second and Third Laws

Visual Concepts: Comparing Mass and Weight •

Teaching Visuals: Static and Kinetic Friction, Friction

Depends on the Surfaces and the Applied Force,

Reaction Forces • Newton's Third Law

Normal Force • Friction • and more

Visual Concepts: Newton's Second Law • Action and

Field Forces • Free-Body Diagrams • Everyday Forces

Teaching Visuals: Force Diagrams and Free-Body
Diagrams • Free-Body Diagram of a Sled Being Pulled

Chapter Resources

■ Textbook: Changes in Motion

Textbook: Newton's First Law

and the Operation of a Seat Belt

Force • Mass and Inertia

PowerPresentations

PowerPresentations

PowerPresentations

Animated Physics: Force

Textbook: Everyday Forces

Coefficients of Friction

PowerPresentations

Instruction

Section

4.1

4.2

4.3

4.4

116A Chapter 4

■ The Teacher's Edition wrap has extensive teaching support for every lesson, including Misconception Alerts, Teach from Visuals, Demonstrations, Teaching Tips, Differentiated Instruction, and Problem Solving.

■ Several additional presentation tools are available online for every chapter, including Animated Physics features,

Labs and Demonstrations

■ Lab: Discovering Newton's Laws

■ **Demonstration:** Inertia

QuickLab: Inertia

Go Online for Materials Lists and Solutions Lists.

■ QuickLab: Force and Changes in Motion

■ **Demonstration:** Mass and Acceleration

■ Lab: Force and Acceleration (Core Skill)

■ **Lab:** Force and Acceleration (Probeware)

■ **Demonstrations:** Static vs. Kinetic Friction, Friction

of Different Surfaces. Friction and Surface Area

**Lab:** Static and Kinetic Friction (Probeware)

Lab: Air Resistance (Probeware)

■ Lab: Parachute (STEM)

**Assessment**

**Enrichment and Challenge**

**■ Differentiated Instruction:** Pre-AP (TE wrap) **■ Why It Matters:** Astronaut Workouts (SE)

**■ Why It Matters (STEM):** Driving and Friction (SE) **■ Timeline—Physics and Its World:** 1540–1690 (SE)

**Online Assessment and Remediation**

**■ Section Quizzes ■ Chapter Tests A and B ■ Alternative Assessment (SE)**

**■ ExamView Banks**

**Where do I find it?**

Animated Physics **■ ■** Demonstrations (TE wrap) **■ ■** Labs **■ ■** Power Presentations **■ ■** QuickLabs **■ ■ ■** Teaching Visuals **■ ■** Textbook **■ ■ ■** Visual Concepts **■ ■**

Interactive Demos **■ ■** Concept Maps **■ ■** Sample Problem Set I **■ ■** Sample Problem Set II **■ ■** Scientific Reasoning Skill Builder **■ ■** Study Guide **■ ■**

Chapter Summary Audio Files **■ ■**

Forces and the Laws of Motion **116B**

Differentiated Instruction (TE wrap) **■**

**PRINT DVD ONLINE**

Static and Kinetic Friction (Probeware)

Air Resistance (Probeware)

Parachute (STEM)


Static vs. Kinetic Friction

Friction and Surface Area

Friction of Different Surfaces

## Focus and Motivate ▼

## **Activate Prior Knowledge**

#### **KNOWLEDGE TO REVIEW**

- Acceleration is the time rate of change of velocity. Because velocity is a vector quantity, acceleration is also a vector quantity.
- Kinematics describes the motion of an object without using the concept of force. Kinematic equations for the special case of constant acceleration were discussed in the chapter "Two-Dimensional Motion and Vectors."
- Vectors are quantities that have both magnitude and direction; the direction and magnitude of vectors can be represented by arrows drawn in the appropriate direction at the appropriate length.

#### **ITEMS TO PROBE**

• **Vector addition:** Have students practice resolving vectors into components, adding the components, and finding the resultant of the vector addition.

#### **CONNECTING TO CHEMISTRY**

It may seem obvious that chemistry is important in the making of materials, but it is also vital to the study of how materials break. Everyday items have to be made to withstand various types of forces or they cannot be used. When excessive force is applied to an object, the material that the object is made of will break. The object breaks because the force creates stress on the bonds between the atoms of the material and causes the

bonds to break. The way material eventually breaks depends on how its atoms are organized. When a material breaks, it is said to have undergone failure. Even though materials are designed to withstand a certain amount of force, the normal wear and tear that materials experience over their lifetimes creates defects in the materials. This process is referred to as fatigue.

After explaining how forces can cause things to break, ask students to give examples

of things that they have seen break. Then ask students to describe the force that caused the object to break. This might help students to develop ideas of when they have seen forces in action.

## **SECTION 1**



> **[Preview Vocabulary]**
>
> **Academic Vocabulary** In common usage, the words *pressure* and *force* sometimes are used interchangeably. In physics, these words are distinctive. *Force* is any effect or power that can change the speed or direction of an object in motion. *Pressure* is used only to define the magnitude of a unit of force exerted on a unit area. So, the magnitude of pressure in physics depends in part on the magnitude of the force involved.
>

## **Teach**


> **[Teaching Tip]**
>
> Now that students have studied motion as complex as projectile motion, explore their understanding of force. Ask them what mechanism causes motion and why some objects accelerate at higher rates than others do. Point out that *force* is attributed to any mechanism that causes or may cause a change in an object's velocity with respect to time.
>

#### **TEACH FROM VISUALS**

**FIGURE 1.1** Point out to students that the ball is experiencing force in all three pictures.

**Ask** How can you tell that the ball experiences at least one force in each picture?

**Answer**: by changes in the ball's speed or direction


Describe how force affects the motion of an object.

Interpret and construct free-body diagrams.

force an action exerted on an object that may change the object's state of rest or motion

# Changes in Motion Objectives

Key Term force

#### Force

You exert a force on a ball when you throw or kick the ball, and you exert a force on a chair when you sit in the chair. Forces describe the interactions between an object and its environment.

#### Forces can cause accelerations.

In many situations, a force exerted on an object can change the object's velocity with respect to time. Some examples of these situations are shown in Figure 1.1. A force can cause a stationary object to move, as when you throw a ball. Force also causes moving objects to stop, as when you catch a ball. A force can also cause a moving object to change direction, such as when a baseball collides with a bat and flies off in another direction. Notice that in each of these cases, the force is responsible for a change in velocity with respect to time—an acceleration.

#### FIGURE 1.1

Three Ways That Forces Change Motion Force can cause objects to (a) start moving, (b) stop moving, and/or (c) change direction.

#### The SI unit of force is the newton.

The SI unit of force is the newton, named after Sir Isaac Newton (1642– 1727), whose work contributed much to the modern understanding of force and motion. The newton (N) is defined as the amount of force that, when acting on a 1 kg mass, produces an acceleration of 1 m/s2. Therefore, 1 N = 1 kg × 1 m/s2.

The weight of an object is a measure of the magnitude of the gravitational force exerted on the object. It is the result of the interaction of an



> **[Differentiated Instruction — Below Level]**
>
> Remind students that photographs, such as those on this page, do not actually show objects "experiencing force." This is because forces cause changes in velocity with respect to time or direction. Challenge students to explain what they would need to see in each photograph if it was a video that showed the effect of forces.
>

#### FIGURE 1.2

| UNITS OF MASS, ACCELERATION, AND FORCE |      |                   |                                         |
|----------------------------------------|------|-------------------|-----------------------------------------|
| System                                 | Mass | Acceleration      | Force                                   |
| SI                                     | kg   | m/s <sup>2</sup>  | $N = kg \bullet m/s^2$                  |
| cgs                                    | g    | cm/s <sup>2</sup> | $\text{dyne} = g \bullet \text{cm/s}^2$ |
| Avoirdupois                            | slug | ft/s <sup>2</sup> | lb = slug•ft/s²                         |

object's mass with the gravitational field of another object, such as Earth. As shown in Figure 1.2, many of the terms and units you use every day to talk about weight are really units of force that can be converted to newtons. For example, a  $\frac{1}{4}$  lb stick of margarine has a weight equivalent to a force of about 1 N, as shown in the following conversions:

> 1 lb = 4.448 N1 N = 0.225 lb

#### Forces can act through contact or at a distance.

If you pull on a spring, the spring stretches. If you pull on a wagon, the wagon moves. When a football is caught, its motion is stopped. These pushes and pulls are examples of contact forces, which are so named because they result from physical contact between two objects. Contact forces are usually easy to identify when you analyze a situation.

Another class of forces—called field forces—does not involve physical contact between two objects. One example of this kind of force is gravitational force. Whenever an object falls to Earth, the object is accelerated by Earth's gravity. In other words, Earth exerts a force on the object even when Earth is not in immediate physical contact with the object.

Another common example of a field force is the attraction or repulsion between electric charges. You can observe this force by rubbing a balloon against your hair and then observing how little pieces of paper appear to jump up and cling to the balloon's surface, as shown in Figure 1.3. The paper is pulled by the balloon's electric field.

The theory of fields was developed as a tool to explain how objects could exert force on each other without touching. According to this theory, masses create gravitational fields in the space around them. An object falls to Earth because of the interaction between the object's mass and Earth's gravitational field. Similarly, charged objects create electromagnetic fields.

The distinction between contact forces and field forces is useful when dealing with forces that we observe at the macroscopic level. (Macroscopic refers to the realm of phenomena that are visible to the naked eye.) As we will see later, all macroscopic contact forces are actually due to microscopic field forces. For instance, contact forces in a collision are due to electric fields between atoms and molecules. In fact, every force can be categorized as one of four fundamental field forces.


> **[Did You Know?]**
>
> The symbol for the pound, lb, comes from libra, the Latin word for "pound," a unit of measure that has been used since medieval times to measure
>
> Forces and the Laws of Motion
>
> **[Differentiated Instruction — English Learners]**
>
> Write the prefixes macro- and micro- on the board or overhead projector. Explain that the prefix macro- refers to something large, while the prefix micro- refers to something small. Challenge students to come up with a definition for words such as macroeconomics, microbe macrobiology, microwave, and micrometer. Allow students to use a dictionary to confirm their definitions.
>

#### **TEACH FROM VISUALS**

FIGURE 1.3 Tell students that both contact and field forces are demonstrated in this picture.

Ask Identify the contact and field force examples in the picture.

**Answer**: contact forces: the figure supporting the pieces of paper, a person supporting the balloon; field forces: gravitational force pulling down on the paper and balloon, electric force pulling up on the paper

## **▼ Teach** continued

## QuickLab

#### **TEACHER'S NOTES**

If the toy car is rolled an appreciable distance before the collision, students may observe the car slowing down because of friction. Give students a brief explanation of friction.

#### Quick LAB

#### MATERIALS

- 1 toy car
- 1 book

#### **FORCE AND CHANGES** IN MOTION

Use a toy car and a book to model a car colliding with a brick wall. Observe the motion of the car before and after the crash. Identify as many changes in its motion as you can, such as changes in speed or direction. Make a list of all of the changes, and try to identify the forces that caused them. Make a force diagram of the collision.

#### **Force Diagrams**

When you push a toy car, it accelerates. If you push the car harder, the acceleration will be greater. In other words, the acceleration of the car depends on the force's magnitude. The direction in which the car moves depends on the direction of the force. For example, if you push the toy car from the front, the car will move in a different direction than if you push it from behind.

#### Force is a vector.

Because the effect of a force depends on both magnitude and direction, force is a vector quantity. Diagrams that show force vectors as arrows, such as Figure 1.4(a), are called *force diagrams*. In this book, the arrows used to represent forces are blue. The tail of an arrow is attached to the object on which the force is acting. A force vector points in the direction of the force, and its length is proportional to the magnitude of the force.

At this point, we will disregard the size and shape of objects and assume that all forces act at the center of an object. In force diagrams, all forces are drawn as if they act at that point, no matter where the force is applied.

#### A free-body diagram helps analyze a situation.

After engineers analyzing a test-car crash have identified all of the forces involved, they isolate the car from the other objects in its environment. One of their goals is to determine which forces affect the car and its passengers. Figure 1.4(b) is a free-body diagram. This diagram represents the same collision that the force diagram (a) does but shows only the car and the forces acting on the car. The forces exerted by the car on other objects are not included in the free-body diagram because they do not affect the motion of the car.

A free-body diagram is used to analyze only the forces affecting the motion of a single object. Free-body diagrams are constructed and analyzed just like other vector diagrams. In Sample Problem A, you will learn to draw free-body diagrams for some situations described in this book. Later, you will learn to use free-body diagrams to find component and resultant forces.

this case, the car

#### **Force Diagrams Versus Free-body** Diagrams (a) In a force diagram, vector arrows represent all the forces acting in a situation. (b) A free-body diagram shows only the forces acting on the object of interest-in



> **[Differentiated Instruction — Pre-AP]**
>
> Explain to students that forces acting on a body at different points can produce translational movement of the body without rotation: rotation without translational movement: or translational movement and rotation together, depending on exactly where the forces act on the body. Discuss examples of each situation. Then explain that the examples in this chapter are limited to translational movement without rotation.
>
> so the sum of forces is all that is required. For this reason, the forces can be drawn as if they act on the body at a common point. The concept of torque is discussed in the chapter "Circular Motion and Gravitation." Rotational equilibrium and dynamics are covered in the Take It Further feature "Rotational Dynamics."
>

#### Drawing Free-Body Diagrams

Sample Problem A **The photograph at right shows a person pulling a sled. Draw a free-body diagram for this sled. The magnitudes of the forces acting on the sled are 60 N by the string, 130 N by Earth (gravitational force), and 90 N upward by the ground.**

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

**Fstring**

**Fstring**

**Fstring**

**FEarth**

**FEarth**


**Fground**


Continued

**Problem Solving**

involving several forces.

**Deconstructing Problems** A good understanding of free-body diagrams is essential to developing strong physics problem-solving skills. Take this time to make sure students can properly dissect a situation

 ANALYZE **Identify the forces acting on the object and the directions of the forces.** • The string exerts 60 N on the sled in the direction that the

string pulls. • Earth exerts a downward force of 130 N on the sled.

It is often helpful to draw a very simple shape with some distinguishing characteristics that will help you visualize the object, as shown in **(a)**. Free-body diagrams are often drawn using simple squares, circles, or even points to represent the object.

In a free-body diagram, only include forces acting on the object. Do not include forces that the object exerts on other objects. In this problem, the forces are given, but later in the chapter, you will need to identify the forces when drawing a free-body diagram.

A free-body diagram of the sled will show all the forces acting on the sled as if the forces are acting on the center of the sled. First, draw and label an arrow that represents the force exerted by the string attached to the sled. The arrow should point in the same direction as the force that the string exerts on the sled, as in **(b)**.

Next, draw and label the gravitational force, which is directed toward the center of Earth, as shown in **(c)**. Finally, draw and label the upward force exerted by the ground, as shown in **(d)**. Diagram **(d)** is the completed

When you draw an arrow representing a force, it is important to label the arrow with either the magnitude of the force or a name that will distinguish it from the other forces acting on the object. Also, be sure that the length of the arrow approximately represents the

free-body diagram of the sled being pulled.


- The ground exerts an upward force of 90 N on the sled. Tips and Tricks

PLAN **Draw a diagram to represent the isolated object.** 

 SOLVE **Draw and label vector arrows for all external forces acting on the object.**

Tips and Tricks

magnitude of the force.


> **[Misconception Alert]**
>
> It is important to emphasize early and consistently that a free-body diagram shows only the forces acting *on* the object. A separate free-body diagram for the person pulling the sled in Sample Problem A can be used to emphasize this point and to introduce Newton's
>
> This Sample Problem focuses on drawing free-body diagrams for given forces. Return to this skill after students have studied Newton's laws and have learned about everyday forces. At that point, ask students to build on this skill by drawing free-body diagrams for given situations where they must identify each force
>
> third law.
>
> involved.
>
> **Solving for:**
>
> **\*Challenging Problem**
>
> *freebody diagrams*
>
> **Teaching Tip**
>
> **PROBLEM guide A**
>
> Use this guide to assign problems. **SE** = Student Edition Textbook **PW** = Sample Problem Set I (online) **PB** = Sample Problem Set II (online)
>
> > **SE** Sample, 1–2; Ch. Rvw. 7–9 **PW** Sample, 1–3 **PB** Sample, 1–3
>
> Forces and the Laws of Motion **121**
>
> Reviewing Main Ideas
>
> think that these are forces.
>
> **4.** Why is force a vector quantity?
>
> fundamental units?
>
> exerted by the kicker.
>
> **Interpreting Graphics**
>
> **Answers to Section Assessment**
>
> 3. the newton;  $1 \text{ N} = 1 \text{ kg} \cdot 1 \text{ m/s}^2$
>
> object acted on by the force.
>
> direction of the kick.
>
> **2.** gravity and electric force, answers will vary; because they can cause a change in motion
>
> 4. because force has both magnitude and
>
> **5.**  $\mathbf{F}_{a}$  points down, and  $\mathbf{F}_{bicker}$  points in the
>
> **6.** Each arrow should have a label identifying the object exerting the force and the
>
> 1. Answers will vary.
>
> **6.** Study the force diagram on the right. Redraw the diagram, and label each vector arrow with a description of the force. In each description, include the object exerting the force and the object on which the force is acting.
>
> List three examples of each of the following:
> a. a force causing an object to start moving
>
> b. a force causing an object to stop moving
>
> c. a force causing an object to change its direction of motion
>
> Give two examples of field forces described in this section and two examples of contact forces you observe in everyday life. Explain why you
>
> 3. What is the SI unit of force? What is this unit equivalent to in terms of
>
> **5.** Draw a free-body diagram of a football being kicked. Assume that the
>
> only forces acting on the ball are the force due to gravity and the force
>
> **FORMATIVE ASSESSMENT**
>
> force of the desk on the book; both
>
> vectors should have the same length
>
> and should be labeled.
>
> **▼** Assess and Reteach
>
> on this page to evaluate student
>
> Reteach For students who need
>
> additional instruction, download the
>
> **Response to Intervention** To reassess
>
> students' mastery, use the Section Quiz,
>
> available to print or to take directly
>
> online at HMDScience.com.
>
> mastery of the section.
>
> Section Study Guide.
>
>
> **Assess** Use the Formative Assessment
>
>
> **SECTION 2**
>
>

## **▼ Teach** continued

## QuickLab

#### **TEACHER'S NOTES**

If students have trouble keeping the ball in place while accelerating the skateboard, they can tape a wooden block onto the skateboard to keep the ball from rolling off the back. Students should recognize that when the skateboard hits the wall, the ball continues moving forward due to its inertia.

net force a single force whose external effects on a rigid body are the same as the effects of several actual forces acting on the body

#### The sum of forces acting on an object is the net force.

Consider a car traveling at a constant velocity. Newton's first law tells us that the net external force on the car must be equal to zero. However, Figure 2.2 shows that many forces act on a car in motion. The vector  $\mathbf{F}_{forward}$ represents the forward force of the road on the tires. The vector  $\mathbf{F}_{resistance'}$ which acts in the opposite direction, is due partly to friction between the road surface and tires and is due partly to air resistance. The vector  $\boldsymbol{F}_{gravity}$ represents the downward gravitational force on the car, and the vector  $\boldsymbol{F_{ground\text{-}on\text{-}car}}$  represents the upward force that the road exerts on the car.

To understand how a car under the influence of so many forces can maintain a constant velocity, you must understand the distinction between external force and net external force. An external force is a single force that acts on an object as a result of the interaction between the object and its environment. All four forces in Figure 2.2 are external forces acting on the car. The **net force** is the vector sum of all forces acting on an object.

When many forces act on an object, it may move in a particular direction with a particular velocity and acceleration. The net force is the force, which when acting alone, produces exactly the same change in motion. When all external forces acting on an object are known, the net force can be found by using the methods for finding resultant vectors. Although four forces are acting on the car in Figure 2.2, the car will maintain a constant velocity if the vector sum of these forces is equal to zero.

#### Mass is a measure of inertia.

Imagine a basketball and a bowling ball at rest side by side on the ground. Newton's first law states that both balls remain at rest as long as no net external force acts on them. Now, imagine supplying a net force by pushing each ball. If the two are pushed with equal force, the basketball will accelerate more than the bowling ball. The bowling ball experiences a smaller acceleration because it has more inertia than the basketball.

As the example of the bowling ball and the basketball shows, the inertia of an object is proportional to the object's mass. The greater the mass of a body, the less the body accelerates under an applied force. Similarly, a light object undergoes a larger acceleration than does a heavy object under the same force. Therefore, mass, which is a measure of the amount of matter in an object, is also a measure of the inertia of an object.

Place a small ball on the rear end in place. Observe what happens of a skateboard or cart. Push the to the ball when the skateboard skateboard across the floor and hits the wall. Can you explain your observation in terms of into a wall. You may need to either hold the ball in place while pushinertia? Repeat the procedure ing the skateboard up to speed or using balls with different masses accelerate the skateboard slowly and compare the results. so that friction holds the ball

#### MATERIALS

- skatehoard or cart
- · toy balls with various masses

Perform this experiment away from walls and furniture that can be damaged.

## **Problem Solving**

#### TAKE IT FURTHER

During liftoff, astronauts on a space shuttle experience tremendous forces. Challenge students to research the forces that act on astronauts as they lift off the launch pad and leave Earth's atmosphere. Ask students to choose one segment of the astronauts' path and create a drawing illustrating the net forces working at that point in time. Suggest that students research education websites hosted by NASA in order to get started.

#### **Determining Net Force**

Sample Problem B Derek leaves his physics book on top of a drafting table that is inclined at a 35° angle. The free-body diagram at right shows the forces acting on the book. Find the net force acting on the book.

#### **ANALYZE**

Define the problem, and identify the variables.

Given:

$$F_{gravity-on-book} = F_g = 22 \text{ N}$$

$$\begin{split} F_{friction} &= F_f = 11 \text{ N} \\ F_{table-on-book} &= F_t = 18 \text{ N} \end{split}$$

 $F_{gravity-on-book} = 22 \text{ N}$ 

 $F_{table-on-book} = 18 \text{ N}$ 

 $F_{friction}$ = 11 N

## **Tips and Tricks**

To simplify the problem, always choose the coordinate system in which as many forces as possible lie on the x- and y-axes.

Select a coordinate system, and apply it to the free-body diagram.

Choose the x-axis parallel to and the y-axis perpendicular to the incline of the table, as shown in (a). This coordinate system is the most convenient because only one force needs to be resolved into x and y components.

#### PLAN Find the x and y components of all vectors.

Draw a sketch, as shown in (b), to help find the components of the vector **Fg**. The angle  $\theta$  is equal to  $180^{\circ} - 90^{\circ} - 35^{\circ} = 55^{\circ}$ .

$$\cos \theta = \frac{F_{g,x}}{F_g}$$

$$\sin\theta = \frac{F_{g,y}}{F_{\sigma}}$$

$$F_{g,x} = F_g \cos \theta$$

$$F_{g,y} = F_g \sin \theta$$

$$F_{g,x} = (22 \text{ N})(\cos 55^\circ) = 13 \text{ N}$$

$$F_{g,y} = (22 \text{ N})(\sin 55^\circ) = 18 \text{ N}$$

Add both components to the free-body diagram, as shown in (c).

(c) 22 N

(e)

#### **SOLVE**

#### Find the net force in both the x and y directions.

Diagram (d) shows another free-body diagram of the book, now with forces acting only along the x- and y-axes.

For the *x* direction:

$$\Sigma F_x = F_{g,x} - F_f$$
  
$$\Sigma F_x = 13 \text{ N} - 11 \text{ N} = 2 \text{ N}$$

$$\Sigma F_y = F_t - F_{g,y}$$
  
$$\Sigma F_y = 18 \text{ N} - 18 \text{ N} = 0 \text{ N}$$

#### Find the net force.

Add the net forces in the x and y directions together as vectors to find the total net force. In this case,  $\mathbf{F}_{net} = 2 \text{ N}$ in the +x direction, as shown in (e). Thus, the book accelerates down the incline.

#### **CHECK YOUR** WORK

The box should accelerate down the incline, so the answer is reasonable

Continued

Forces and the Laws of Motion

#### 125

#### **ALTERNATIVE APPROACHES**

For free-body diagrams, it sometimes helps to try a different arrangement of the vectors. Show students that, by arranging the force vectors on the coordinate system in such a way that more vectors lie on one of the axes, there will be fewer vectors to resolve into components. As a result, calculating the solution will take fewer steps.

#### **Classroom Practice**

#### **DETERMINING NET FORCE**

An agriculture student is designing a support to keep a tree upright. Two wires have been attached to the tree and placed at right angles to each other. One wire exerts a force of 30.0 N on the tree: the other wire exerts a 40.0 N force. Determine where to place a third wire and how much force it should exert so that the net force acting on the tree is equal to zero.

**Answer**: 50.0 N at 143° from the 40.0 N force and at 127° from the 30.0 N force

A flying, stationary kite is acted on by a force of 9.8 N downward. The wind exerts a force of 45 N at an angle of 50.0° above the horizontal. Find the force that the string exerts on the kite.

Answer: 38 N. 40° below the horizontal

## **▼ Teach** continued

#### **Answers**

#### Practice B

- **1.**  $F_y = 60.6 \text{ N}$ ;  $F_y = 35.0 \text{ N}$
- 2. 2.48 N at 25.0° counterclockwise from straight down
- **3.** 557 N at 35.7° west of north

#### PROBLEM GUIDE B

Use this guide to assign problems.

**SE** = Student Edition Textbook

**PW** = Sample Problem Set I (online)

**PB** = Sample Problem Set II (online)

#### **Solving for:**

| $F_x$ , $F_y$    | SE | Sample, 1;<br>Ch. Rvw. 11–12      |
|------------------|----|-----------------------------------|
|                  | PW | 3, 4*, 5*                         |
|                  | РВ | 7–10                              |
| F <sub>net</sub> | SE | Sample, 2–3;<br>Ch. Rvw. 10, 22a* |
|                  | PW | Sample, 1–2                       |
|                  | РВ | 1–6                               |

#### \*Challenging Problem

## Why It Matters

Scientists have determined that the body adjusts its stride to changes in inertia differently than it adjusts to changes in weight. Point out that this experiment suggests that changing inertia (mass) does not increase the net force on runners in microgravity. Ask students to think about resistance training and list ways that astronauts could replace the resistance of gravity while in space. Then explain that astronauts use bungee cords to replace the resistance of gravity during exercise. However, bungees replace only about 60% of the astronauts' weight on Earth.

#### **Determining Net Force** (continued)

#### **Practice**

#### **Tips and Tricks**

If there is a net force in both the x and v directions, use vector addition to find the total net force.

- 1. A man is pulling on his dog with a force of  $70.0 \, \mathrm{N}$  directed at an angle of  $+30.0^{\circ}$  to the horizontal. Find the *x* and *y* components of this force.
- 2. A gust of wind blows an apple from a tree. As the apple falls, the gravitational force on the apple is 2.25 N downward, and the force of the wind on the apple is 1.05 N to the right. Find the magnitude and direction of the net force on the apple.
- 3. The wind exerts a force of 452 N north on a sailboat, while the water exerts a force of 325 N west on the sailboat. Find the magnitude and direction of the net force on the sailboat.

#### WHY IT MATTERS

## **Astronaut Workouts**

ravity helps to keep bones strong. Loss of bone density is a serious outcome of time spent in space. Astronauts routinely exercise on treadmills to counteract the effects of microgravity on their skeletal systems. But is it possible to increase the value of their workouts by increasing their mass? And does it matter if they run or walk?

A team of scientists recruited runners to help find out. The runners used treadmills that measured the net force on their legs, or ground reaction force, while they ran and walked. The runners' inertia was changed by adding masses to a weighted vest. A spring system supported them as they exercised. Although the spring system did not simulate weightless conditions, it kept their weight the same even as their inertia was changed by the added mass. This mimicked the situation in Earth orbit, where a change in mass does not result in a change in weight.

The scientists were surprised to discover that ground reaction force did not increase with mass while the subjects were running. Ground reaction force did increase with mass while the subjects were walking. But overall, ground reaction force for running was still greater. So astronauts still need to run, not walk-and they can't shorten their workouts by carrying more mass.

## **Problem Solving**

#### TAKE IT FURTHER

After solving Practice B(1), ask students to find the net force of the x and y components. The net force on the x component is 9.4 N and the net force on the y component is 35 N. Such extension of the problem can be considered as the evaluation method.

#### Equilibrium

Objects that are either at rest or moving with constant velocity are said to be in equilibrium. Newton's first law describes objects in equilibrium, whether they are at rest or moving with a constant velocity. Newton's first law states one condition that must be true for equilibrium: the net force acting on a body in equilibrium must be equal to zero.

equilibrium the state in which the net force on an object is zero

The net force on the fishing bob in Figure 2.3(a) is equal to zero because the bob is at rest. Imagine that a fish bites the bait, as shown in Figure 2.3(b). Because a net force is acting on the line, the bob accelerates toward the hooked fish.

Now, consider a different scenario. Suppose that at the instant the fish begins pulling on the line, the person reacts by applying a force to the bob that is equal and opposite to the force exerted by the fish. In this case, the net force on the bob remains zero, as shown in Figure 2.3(c), and the bob remains at rest. In this example, the bob is at rest while in equilibrium, but an object can also be in equilibrium while moving at a constant velocity.

An object is in equilibrium when the vector sum of the forces acting on the object is equal to zero. To determine whether a body is in equilibrium, find the net force, as shown in Sample Problem B. If the net force is zero, the body is in equilibrium. If there is a net force, a second force equal and opposite to this net force will put the body in equilibrium.


> **[Formative Assessment]**
>

#### Reviewing Main Ideas

- 1. If a car is traveling westward with a constant velocity of 20 m/s, what is the net force acting on the car?
- 2. If a car is accelerating downhill under a net force of 3674 N, what additional force would cause the car to have a constant velocity?
- 3. The sensor in the torso of a crash-test dummy records the magnitude and direction of the net force acting on the dummy. If the dummy is thrown forward with a force of 130.0 N while simultaneously being hit from the side with a force of 4500.0 N, what force will the sensor report?
- 4. What force will the seat belt have to exert on the dummy in item 3 to hold the dummy in the seat?

#### Critical Thinking

5. Can an object be in equilibrium if only one force acts on the object?


> **[Answers to Section Assessment]**
>
>
> - **1.** zero
> - **2.** -3674 N
> - **3.** 4502 N at 1.655° forward of the side
> - **4.** the same magnitude as the net force in item 3 but in the opposite direction
> - **5.** No, either no force or two or more forces are required for equilibrium.
>

#### **TEACH FROM VISUALS**

**FIGURE 2.3** Point out that in order for the bob to be in equilibrium, all the forces must cancel. You may want to diagram this situation on the board and include the force of the water on the bob (buoyant force).

**Ask** Other than the forces applied by the person and the fish, do any other forces act on the bob?

**Answer**: yes, the upward (buoyant) force of the water on the bob and the downward gravitational force

## **Assess and Reteach**

**Assess** Use the Formative Assessment on this page to evaluate student mastery of the section.

**Reteach** For students who need additional instruction, download the Section Study Guide.

**Response to Intervention** To reassess students' mastery, use the Section Quiz, available to print or to take directly online at **HMDScience.com**.

Forces and the Laws of Motion **127**


## **▼ Plan and Prepare**


> **[Preview Vocabulary]**
>
> disobey the law and that certain
>
> **Scientific Meanings** In everyday speech, the word *law* usually refers to a system of rules established by a government for the behavior of humans and their organizations. Inherent in this meaning is the idea that people can
>
> behaviors are illegal or against the law.
>
> Explain to students that a scientific law
>
> that always occur in the same way, each
>
> time the events are observed. It is not
>
> possible to break a scientific law in
>
> the same sense that a human law
>
> **Demonstration**
>
> MASS AND ACCELERATION
>
> objects with different masses.
>
> Purpose Visualize the acceleration of
>
> **Materials** balls of similar diameter but different mass, such as a Styrofoam ball, rubber ball, and large steel ball bearing
>
> **Procedure** Place the balls in a row near one edge of a long table. Invite a
>
> student to accelerate each ball by hitting it with a forefinger *gently* flicked off a thumb. Ask students to observe the distance each ball moves. Point out that,
>
> although the force used on each ball is roughly the same, the balls with greater
>
> mass do not roll as far as the ones with
>
> lesser mass. (If results are not as ex-
>
> pected, discuss friction between the
>
> additional force acting on the balls.)
>
>
> surface of the balls and the table as an
>
> can be broken.
>
> **▼** Teach
>
> describes events in the natural world
>
>

#### Objectives

Describe an object's acceleration in terms of its mass and the net force acting on it.

Predict the direction and magnitude of the acceleration caused by a known net force.

Identify action-reaction pairs.

FIGURE 3.1

**Differentiated Instruction** 

Tactile learners might benefit from a quick

activity to demonstrate Newton's second law.

Provide small groups of students with a spring

scale and a 1-kg mass. Ask students to demon-

Students should recall that 1 N is equal to the force needed to accelerate a 1-kg mass 1 m/s².

Ask students to explain how they know how much force was needed to accelerate the mass. They should recognize that they need to

strate a force of 1 N using the spring scale.

**INCLUSION** 

# Newton's Second and Third Laws

#### **Newton's Second Law**

object at the same rate.

Relationship Between Force and Acceleration (a) A small force on an

object causes a small acceleration, but (b) a larger force causes a larger acceleration.

a known force affect the motion of an object?

Force is proportional to mass and acceleration.

From Newton's first law, we know that an object with no net force acting on it is in a state of equilibrium. We also know that an object experiencing a net force undergoes a change in its velocity. But exactly how much does

Imagine pushing a stalled car through a level intersection, as shown in Figure 3.1. Because a net force causes an object to accelerate, the speed of

the car will increase. When you push the car by yourself, however,

the acceleration will be so small that it will take a long time for you to

notice an increase in the car's speed. If you get several friends to help you, the net force on the car is much greater, and the car will soon be moving

so fast that you will have to run to keep up with it. This change happens

because the acceleration of an object is directly proportional to the net

disregards any friction forces that would hinder the motion. In reality, the car accelerates when the push is greater than the frictional force. However, when the force exerted by the pushers equals the frictional force, the net force becomes zero, and the car moves at a constant velocity.)

force acting on the object. (Note that this is an idealized example that

Experience reveals that the mass of an object also affects the object's acceleration. A lightweight car accelerates more than a heavy truck if the same force is applied to both. Thus, it requires less force to accelerate a low-mass object than it does to accelerate a high-mass

read the spring scale to get that information.

acceleration of the mass. They would need to

between **F**, *m*, and **a:** force is equal to the mass

add more mass. Emphasize for the students

that this demonstrates the relationship

times the acceleration.

Ask students how they could increase the

bl), (br) ©Houghton Mifflin Harcourt

**Interactive** Demo

**Tips and Tricks** 

of the net force.

Forces and the Laws of Motion

the Sample Problem. They can then plug in the numbers that they have and solve for accelera-

tion. Students who have difficulty seeing why

benefit from seeing the division and cancella-

 $\Sigma \mathbf{F} = m\mathbf{a}$   $\frac{\Sigma \mathbf{F}}{m} = \frac{m\mathbf{a}}{m}$   $\mathbf{a} = \frac{\Sigma \mathbf{F}}{m}$ 

the rearranged equation is equivalent will

tion of mass:

If more than one force is acting on an object, you must find the net force as shown in Sample Problem B before

applying Newton's second law. The

acceleration will be in the direction

129

HMDScience.com

In this equation,  $\mathbf{a}$  is the acceleration of the object and m is the object's mass. Note that  $\Sigma$  is the Greek capital letter sigma, which represents the sum of the quantities that come after it. In this case,  $\Sigma \mathbf{F}$  represents the

vector sum of all external forces acting on the object, or the net force.

Sample Problem C Roberto and Laura are studying across

Roberto. If the net force acting on the book is 1.6 N to the right,

Given:

**DECONSTRUCTING PROBLEMS** 

When solving problems of Newton's second

law, encourage students to begin by writing

that they have been given. Work through

Sample Problem C with the students. Point out that they know the force and the mass. They need to solve for the acceleration.

the formula  $\Sigma \mathbf{F} = m\mathbf{a}$ . They should then read

through the problem and identify the variables

Call attention to the need to rearrange the equation to solve for acceleration, as shown in

Unknown:

from each other at a wide table. Laura slides a 2.2 kg book toward

m = 2.2 kg

Use Newton's second law, and solve for a.

 $\Sigma \mathbf{F} = m\mathbf{a}$ , so  $\mathbf{a} = \frac{\Sigma \mathbf{F}}{m}$ 

 $a = \frac{1.6 \text{ N}}{2.2 \text{ kg}} = 0.73 \text{ m/s}^2$ 

 $\mathbf{a} = 0.73 \,\mathrm{m/s^2}$  to the right

 $\mathbf{F}_{\mathbf{net}} = \Sigma \mathbf{F} = 1.6 \,\mathrm{N}$  to the right

**Newton's Second Law** 

what is the book's acceleration?

ANALYZE

SOLVE

Continued

**Problem Solving** 

**Answer**: 83 N

**Solving for:** 

m

PROBLEM GUIDE C

Use this guide to assign problems. **SE** = Student Edition Textbook **PW** = Sample Problem Set I (online)

**PB** = Sample Problem Set II (online)

**PB** 7–10

**PB** 4–6 **SE** 4

**PW** 14a

\*Challenging Problem

50\*, 51

PB Sample, 1–3

**SE** Sample, 1–3; Ch.

Rvw. 20, 22b\*, 42a, 44a, 45a\*, 48a\*

5\*; Ch. Rvw. 19, 21, 40\*,

41, 42b\*, 43, 44b, 45a\*,

**PW** 2b, 9–11, 12\*, 13b\*, 14b

**PW** Sample, 1–2a, 3–5, 6\*,


7\*, 8\*, 13a\*

do with each other) the magnitude (size) of


Newton's Second Law (continued)

#### Newton's Third Law

same time as the action force.

exerts on the barrier the reaction.

have a net force acting on it.


**If two objects interact, the magnitude of the force exerted on object 1 by object 2 is equal to the magnitude of the force simultaneously exerted on object 2 by object 1, and these two forces are opposite in direction.**

An alternative statement of this law is that *for every action, there is an equal and opposite reaction*. When two objects interact with one another, the forces that the objects exert on each other are called an *actionreaction pair*. The force that object 1 exerts on object 2 is sometimes called the *action force*, while the force that object 2 exerts on object 1 is called the *reaction force*. The action force is equal in magnitude and

opposite in direction to the reaction force. The terms *action* and *reaction* sometimes cause confusion because they are used a little differently in physics than they are in everyday speech. In everyday speech, the word *reaction* is used to refer to something that happens *after* and *in response to* an event. In physics, however, the reaction force occurs at ex actly the

Because the action and reaction forces coexist, either force can be called the action or the reaction. For example, you could call the force that the car exerts on the barrier the action and the force that the barrier exerts on the car the reaction. Likewise, you could choose to call the force that the barrier exerts on the car the action and the force that the car

Action and reaction forces each act on different objects. One important thing to remember about action-reaction pairs is that each force acts on a different object. Consider the task of driving a nail into wood, as illustrated in Figure 3.2. To accelerate the nail and drive it into the wood, the hammer exerts a force on the nail. According to Newton's third law, the nail exerts a force on the hammer that is equal to

the magnitude of the force that the hammer exerts on the nail.

The concept of action-reaction pairs is a common source of confusion because some people assume incorrectly that the equal and opposite forces balance one another and make any change in the state of motion impossible. If the force that the nail exerts on the hammer is equal to the force the hammer exerts on the nail, why doesn't the nail remain at rest? The motion of the nail is affected only by the forces acting on the nail. To determine whether the nail will accelerate, draw a free-body diagram to isolate the forces acting on the nail, as shown in Figure 3.3. The force of the nail on the hammer is not included in the diagram because it does not act on the nail. According to the diagram, the nail will be driven into the wood because there is a net force acting on the nail. Thus, actionreaction pairs do not imply that the net force on either object is zero. The action-reaction forces are equal and opposite, but either object may still

**Fhammer-on-nail**


nail into the wood.

Net Force on a Hammer The net force acting on the nail drives the

FIGURE3.3

Forces on a Hammer and Nail The force that the nail exerts on the hammer is equal and opposite to the force that the hammer exerts

on the nail.

FIGURE 3.2

**Fwood-on-nail**


> **[Misconception Alert]**
>
> It is important to clear up any misconception that action and reaction forces cancel each other. One way to reinforce the true nature of Newton's third law is to use free-body diagrams. On the board, draw separate free-body diagrams for two or more interacting objects,
>
> such as a book on a table. Identify the pairs of forces and point out that the force arrows are on separate bodies. The motion of the book is affected only by forces on the book. The motion of the table is affected only by forces on the table. Have students practice drawing free-body diagrams for multiple objects, building up levels of complexity with each new diagram (for example, a book on an inclined plane on a table on Earth).
>
> Forces and the Laws of Motion **131**
>
> Reviewing Main Ideas
>
> diagram for each object.)
>
> a. A person takes a step.
>
> tion of the boat's acceleration?
>
> Critical Thinking
>
> **Answers to Section Assessment**
>
> **2.** The reaction force acts on the child, not on the wagon itself, so there is still a net
>
> 3. a. person pushes on ground; ground
>
> exerts force on snowball
>
> **b.** snowball exerts force on back: back
>
> c. ball exerts force on glove; glove exerts
>
> **1. a.** 12 N
>
>
> **b.**  $3.0 \text{ m/s}^2$
>
> force on the wagon.
>
> force on ball
>
> pushes on person
>
> b. A snowball hits someone in the back.c. A baseball player catches a ball.d. A gust of wind strikes a window.
>
> greater acceleration? Explain your answers.
>
> **SECTION 3 FORMATIVE ASSESSMENT**
>
> a. What is the magnitude of the net force acting on the object?b. If this same force is applied to a 4.0 kg object, what acceleration is
>
> 3. Identify the action-reaction pairs in the following situations:
>
> A child causes a wagon to accelerate by pulling it with a horizontal force. Newton's third law says that the wagon exerts an equal and opposite force on the child. How can the wagon accelerate? (Hint: Draw a free-body
>
> 4. The forces acting on a sailboat are 390 N north and 180 N east. If the boat (including crew) has a mass of 270 kg, what are the magnitude and direc-
>
> **5.** If a small sports car collides head-on with a massive truck, which vehicle experiences the greater impact force? Which vehicle experiences the
>
> d. wind exerts force on window; window
>
> **4.** 1.6 m/s<sup>2</sup> at an angle of 65° north of east
>
> The sports car experiences the larger acceleration because it has a smaller mass,
>
> 5. Each impact force has the same magnitude.
>
> and acceleration is inversely proportional
>
> exerts force on wind
>
> to mass.
>
> 1. A 6.0 kg object undergoes an acceleration of 2.0 m/s<sup>2</sup>.
>
> **SECTION 4**
>

## **▼ Teach** continued

#### **TEACH FROM VISUALS**

**FIGURE 4.2** Tell students that the television is in equilibrium, so the normal force from the table must be equal in magnitude and opposite in direction to the gravitational force exerted on the television.

Instruct students to draw free-body

diagrams for the television, table, and

Ask Do the forces in Figure 4.2

(Newton's third law)?

action-reaction pair.

**Teaching Tip** 

constitute an action-reaction pair

**Answer**: No, both forces act on the television and therefore cannot be an

Be sure students understand why the

two angles labeled  $\theta$  in **Figure 4.3** are equal. Recognizing equal angles in

free-body diagrams is an important

problem-solving skill for this chapter.

Earth and to identify the third-law pairs.

FIGURE 4.2

#### **Normal Force**

In this example, the normal force,  $\mathbf{F}_n$ , is equal and opposite to the force due to gravity,  $\mathbf{F}_g$ .

FIGURE 4.3

Normal Force When an

static friction the force that resists

the initiation of sliding motion between two surfaces that are in contact and

**Overcoming the Force of Friction** 

(a) Because this jug of juice is in

equilibrium, any unbalanced

cause the jug to accelerate.

Differentiated Instruction

Hands-on exploration will help students to

better understand the difference between

them to explore friction by gently pushing

objects of varying mass across their desks.

overcome static friction? Students may say

larger or heavier objects. Remind them that

Which objects required greater force to

these objects have greater mass.

static friction and kinetic friction. Encourage

**BELOW LEVEL** 

horizontal force applied to it will

Object Is on a Ramp

The normal force is not

always opposite the force

due to gravity, as shown

by this example of

a refrigerator on

a loading ramp.

FIGURE 4.4

horizontal line.

The Force of Friction

The word *normal* is used because the direction of the contact force is perpendicular to the table surface and one meaning of the word *normal* is "perpendicular." Figure 4.2 shows the forces acting on the television.

The normal force is always perpendicular to the contact surface but is not always opposite in direction to the force due to gravity. **Figure 4.3** shows a free-body diagram of a refrigerator on a loading ramp. The normal force is perpendicular to the ramp, not directly opposite the force due to gravity. In the absence of other forces, the normal force,  $\mathbf{F_n}$ , is equal and opposite to the component of  $\mathbf{F_g}$  that is perpendicular to the contact surface. The magnitude of the normal force can be calculated as  $F_n = mg\cos\theta$ . The angle  $\theta$  is the angle between the normal force and a vertical line and is also the angle between the contact surface and a

Consider a jug of juice at rest (in equilibrium) on a table, as in Figure 4.4(a).

We know from Newton's first law that the net force acting on the jug is

zero. Newton's second law tells us that any additional unbalanced force

applied to the jug will cause the jug to accelerate and to remain in motion

unless acted on by another force. But experience tells us that the jug will

not move at all if we apply a very small horizontal force. Even when we

apply a force large enough to move the jug, the jug will stop moving

When the jug is at rest, the only forces acting on it are the force due to gravity and the normal force exerted by the table. These forces are equal and opposite, so the jug is in equilibrium. When you push the jug with a small horizontal force **F**, as shown in **Figure 4.4(b)**, the table exerts an equal

force in the opposite direction. As a result, the jug remains in equilibrium

(c) The jug begins to accelerate as soon

as the applied force exceeds the

opposing static-friction force.

Encourage students to discuss examples of friction in everyday life. How is static friction

involved in walking? Static friction holds your

foot in place while you move your other foot.

Compare the friction of walking on an icy

surface compared with a dry one. Less static

to overcome, which makes you slip and fall.

to keep it moving than to start it moving?

Static friction is greater than kinetic friction.

friction on ice means that the friction is easier

When pushing something large, why is it easier

and therefore also remains at rest. The resistive force that keeps the jug

from moving is called the force of static friction, abbreviated as  $F_s$ .

almost as soon as we remove this applied force.

Friction opposes the applied force.

(b) When a small force is applied, the jug

remains in equilibrium because the

static-friction force is equal but

opposite to the applied force.

FIGURE 4.5

at only a few points.

Forces and the Laws of Motion

135

**Microscopic View of Surfaces** 

in Contact On the microscopic level,

even very smooth surfaces make contact

illustrated in Figure 4.5. Notice that the surfaces are in contact at only a few points. When two surfaces are stationary with respect to each other, the

In free-body diagrams, the force of friction is always parallel to the surface of contact.

The force of kinetic friction is always opposite the direction of motion. To determine

object in equilibrium, the frictional force must point in the direction that results in a

the direction of the force of static friction, use the principle of equilibrium. For an

It is easier to push a chair across the floor at a constant speed than to

observations show that the magnitude of the force of friction is approximately proportional to the magnitude of the normal force that a surface

exerts on an object. Because the desk is heavier than the chair, the desk

also experiences a greater normal force and therefore greater friction.

Keep in mind that the force of friction is really a macroscopic effect

caused by a complex combination of forces at a microscopic level.

However, we can approximately calculate the force of friction with certain assumptions. The relationship between normal force and the force of

friction is one factor that affects friction. For instance, it is easier to slide a

relationship between the normal force and the force of friction provides a

good approximation for the friction between dry, flat surfaces that are at

light textbook across a desk than it is to slide a heavier textbook. The

push a heavy desk across the floor at the same speed. Experimental

The force of friction is proportional to the normal force.

Friction can be calculated approximately.

rest or sliding past one another.

surfaces stick together somewhat at the contact points. This adhesion is

caused by electrostatic forces between molecules of the two surfaces.

**Tips and Tricks** 

net force of zero.

several trials. Have students record all

surfaces remain the same, so the only

difference in the two average values is

FRICTION OF DIFFERENT SURFACES

**Purpose** Show students that the force

of friction depends on the surface.

Materials large cube with different

materials (such as glass, carpeting, and sandpaper) covering each of four sides,

with two sides left uncovered: hook:

**Procedure** Attach the hook to one of

the two uncovered sides of the block.

Pull the block across the table with the

spring scale. Repeat the demonstration

with a new surface of the cube exposed to the table. Repeat the demonstration


for the two remaining covered sides. Have students summarize the results and reach a conclusion concerning the nature of the surfaces in contact and

out that the normal force and the

due to motion.

spring scale

the frictional force.

**Demonstration** 

data and find the average for each. Point

#### **Coefficients of Friction**

Forces and the Laws of Motion

137

Sample Problem D A 24 kg crate initially at rest on a horizontal floor requires a 75 N horizontal force to set it in motion. Find the coefficient of static friction between the crate and the floor.

ANALYZE

**Tips and Tricks** Because the crate is on

a horizontal surface, the

magnitude of the normal

friction, between the crate and the floor.

moving at a constant velocity.

force  $(F_n)$  equals the crate's weight (mg).

2 SOLVE

**Practice** 

Given:

$$F_{s,max} = F_{applied} = 75 \text{ N}$$

 $\mu_{s} = \frac{F_{s,max}}{F_{rr}} = \frac{F_{s,max}}{mg}$ 

 $\mu_s = \frac{75 \text{ N}}{24 \text{ kg} \times 9.81 \text{m/s}^2}$ 

m = 24 kg

Use the equation for the coefficient of

 $\mu_s = 0.32$ 

1. Once the crate in Sample Problem D is in motion, a horizontal force of 53 N keeps

2. A 25 kg chair initially at rest on a horizontal floor requires a 165 N horizontal force

to set it in motion. Once the chair is in motion, a 127 N horizontal force keeps it

3. A museum curator moves artifacts into place on various different display surfaces.

Use the values in Figure 4.7 to find  $F_{s.max}$  and  $F_k$  for the following situations:

a. moving a 145 kg aluminum sculpture across a horizontal steel platform

b. pulling a 15 kg steel sword across a horizontal steel shield c. pushing a 250 kg wood bed on a horizontal wood floor

d. sliding a 0.55 kg glass amulet on a horizontal glass display case

the crate moving with a constant velocity. Find  $\mu_{k}$ , the coefficient of kinetic

a. Find the coefficient of static friction between the chair and the floor. **b.** Find the coefficient of kinetic friction between the chair and the floor.

static friction.

Unknown:  $\mu_{\rm s} = ?$  **Classroom Practice** 

#### **COEFFICIENTS OF FRICTION**

PROBLEM GUIDE D

Use this guide to assign problems.

**PW** = Sample Problem Set I (online)

**PB** = Sample Problem Set II (online)

**PW** 4-7.10\* **PB** 8-10


PB

\*Challenging Problem

**Answers** 

**Practice D** 

**2. a.** 0.67

**b.** 0.52

**d.** 5 N, 2 N

**1.** 0.23

**PW** 8-9

3. a.  $8.7 \times 10^2$  N,  $6.7 \times 10^2$  N **b.**  $1.1 \times 10^2$  N, 84 N **c.**  $1 \times 10^3$  N,  $5 \times 10^2$  N

Sample, 1-2; Ch. Rvw.

35, 36\*, 37\*, 49

**PW** Sample, 1–3, 7, 10\*

Sample, 1–4


**SE** = Student Edition Textbook

A refrigerator is placed on a ramp. The refrigerator begins to slide when the ramp is raised to an angle of 34°. What is the coefficient of static friction?

**Answer**: 0.67

**Solving for:** 

 $F_{n}$ , m

Choose a convenient coordinate system, and find the x and y

 $F_{annlied,v} = (90.0 \text{ N})(\sin 30.0^{\circ}) = 45.0 \text{ N (upward)}$ 

A. Find the normal force, F<sub>n</sub>, by applying the condition of equilibrium in the vertical direction: ΣF<sub>y</sub> = 0.
 B. Calculate the force of kinetic friction on the box:

**C.** Apply Newton's second law along the horizontal direction to find the acceleration of the box:

Substitute the values into the equations and solve: **A.** To apply the condition of equilibrium in the vertical direction, you need to account for all of the forces in the y direction:  $F_g$ ,  $F_n$ , and  $F_{applied,y}$ . You know  $F_{applied,y}$  and can use the box's mass to find  $F_a$ .

 $F_{applied, y} = 45.0 \text{ N}$ 

 $F_{\sigma} = (20.0 \text{ kg})(9.81 \text{ m/s}^2) = 196 \text{ N}$ 

 $F_{applied} = 90 \text{ N}$ 

Moughton Mifflin Harcourt

Continued

 $(F_{applied})^2 = (F_{applied x})^2 + (F_{applied y})^2 = (77.9)^2 + (45)^2$ 

 $F_{applied.x} = (90.0 \text{ N})(\cos 30.0^{\circ}) = 77.9 \text{ N} \text{ (to the right)}$ 

The diagram at left shows the most convenient coordinate system, because the only force to resolve into components

components of all forces.

Choose an equation or situation:

 $\Sigma F_x = ma_x$ 

PLAN

3 SOLVE

**ALTERNATIVE APPROACHES** 

When evaluating the measures of  $F_{applied, x}$  and

When solving for  $F_{applied, x}$  and  $F_{applied, y}$ , use the

 $F_{applied,y}$ , remind students that they may use the Pythagorean theorem. This is the equation that compares the three sides of a right triangle. The theorem can be written as:

**Problem Solving** 

 $a^2 + b^2 = c^2$ 

equation as so:

the floor?

**Answer**: 0.22

the sofa easier?


How could the students make moving

**Answer**: They could change the angles,

put the sofa on rollers, or wax the floors.

## **▼ Teach** continued

## Why It Matters

the necessary frictional forces.

Point out to students that the

friction between a tire and pavement is

more complex than the simple sliding friction between dry surfaces, which

they have been studying. The force of friction on a car tire is not necessarily

simply proportional to the normal force.

The fact that there is not a simple proportion between the frictional and

normal forces is due in part to the fact

vertically away from the surface rather

than continuously slide across it. Also,

when the road is covered with water or

snow, other factors such as viscosity

come into play.

**140** Chapter 4

that the tires are rolling, so they peel

#### **DRIVING AND FRICTION**

The coefficient of friction between the ground and the tires of a car is less when rain or snow is on the ground. Snow and rain tires are excellent examples of ways that tires are adapted to regain some of

#### Air resistance is a form of friction.

called the terminal speed.

WHY IT MATTERS S.T.E.M.

**Driving and Friction** 

ccelerating a car seems simple to the driver. It is just a matter of pressing on a pedal or turning a

wheel. But what are the forces involved?

A car moves because as its wheels turn, they push

back against the road. It is actually the reaction force of

Thus, acceleration requires this friction. Water and snow

provide less friction and therefore reduce the amount of

As a car moves slowly over an area of water on the road, the water is squeezed out from under the tires.

If the car moves too quickly, there is not enough time for

under the tires. The water trapped between the tires and

the weight of the car to squeeze the water out from

phenomenon called hydroplaning. When this situation

the road will lift the tires and car off the road, a

**Differentiated Instruction** 

Objects moving in outer space do not

experience air resistance. Thus, Earth continu-

(Earth's speed is actually decreasing because of

frequent collisions with small masses such as

meteoroids, but this effect is minor.) Earth's

velocity does, however, change slightly as it orbits the sun. Have students do research to

ally orbits the sun without slowing down.

PRE-AP

control the driver has over the direction and speed of

the road pushing on the car that causes the car to

and the car would not experience a reaction force.

accelerate. Without the friction between the tires and the road, the wheels would not be able to exert this force

Another type of friction, the retarding force produced by air resistance, is important in the analysis of motion. Whenever an object moves through a fluid medium, such as air or water, the fluid provides a resistance to the object's motion.

For example, the force of air resistance,  $\mathbf{F_R}$ , on a moving car acts in the direction opposite the direction of the car's motion. At low speeds, the magnitude of  $\mathbf{F_R}$  is roughly proportional to the car's speed. At higher speeds,  $\mathbf{F_R}$  is roughly proportional to the square of the car's speed. When the magnitude of  $\mathbf{F_R}$  equals the magnitude of the force moving the car forward, the net force is zero and the car moves at a constant speed. A similar situation occurs when an object falls through air. As a

increases, the resistance of the air to the object's motion also constantly

object continues to move downward with a constant maximum speed,

occurs, there is very little friction between the tires and

the water, and the car becomes difficult to control.

To prevent hydroplaning, rain tires, such as the ones

shown above, keep water from accumulating between

the tire and the road. Deep channels down the center of the tire provide a place for the water to accumulate, and curved grooves in the tread channel the water outward.

Because snow moves even less easily than water,

snow tires have several deep grooves in their tread,

enabling the tire to cut through the snow and make

against the snow and, like the paddle blades of a

find out what factor affects Earth's velocity

Earth moves slightly faster in its orbit when

it is closer to the sun in January than when it is

farthest from the sun in July. This difference is

a corollary to Kepler's second law of planetary

motion, the equal-area law, which describes

the movement of planets in elliptical orbits.

in its orbit.

contact with the pavement. These deep grooves push

riverboat, use the snow's inertia to provide resistance.

OThe Goodyear Tire & Rubber Company

free-falling body accelerates, its velocity increases. As the velocity

increases. When the upward force of air resistance balances the downward gravitational force, the net force on the object is zero and the

Forces and the Laws of Motion

5. no; Once at equilibrium, the velocity will

not increase, so the force of air resistance

**2. a.** 3.70 N

**3. a.** 34 N

**b.** 58.5 N

**b.** 39 N

will not increase.

**4.** 0.37, 0.32

141


**SECTION 4 FORMATIVE ASSESSMENT** 

1. Draw a free-body diagram for each of the following objects:

**a.** a projectile accelerating downward in the presence of air resistance **b.** a crate being pushed across a flat surface at a constant speed

a. What is its weight in newtons on the moon, where the acceleration due

b. What is its weight on Jupiter, where the acceleration due to gravity is

a. Determine the magnitude of this horizontal force. (Disregard friction.)

3. A 2.0 kg block on an incline at a 60.0° angle is held in equilibrium by a

5. The force of air resistance acting on a certain falling object is roughly proportional to the square of the object's velocity and is directed upward. If the object falls fast enough, will the force of air resistance eventually exceed the weight of the object and cause the object to move upward? Explain.

b. Determine the magnitude of the normal force on the block.
4. A 55 kg ice skater is at rest on a flat skating rink. A 198 N horizontal force is needed to set the skater in motion. However, after the skater is in motion, a horizontal force of 175 N keeps the skater moving at a constant velocity. Find the coefficients of static and kinetic friction between the

Reviewing Main Ideas

2. A bag of sugar has a mass of 2.26 kg.

2.64 times that on Earth?

horizontal force.

skates and the ice.

Critical Thinking

arrow **F**...

to gravity is one-sixth that on Earth?

**Answers to Section Assessment** 

**1. a.** An arrow labeled **F**<sub>g</sub> should point down,

arrow **F**<sub>g</sub> should be longer than the

**b.**  $\mathbf{F}_{\mathbf{g}}$  points down,  $\mathbf{F}_{\mathbf{n}}$  points up,  $\mathbf{F}_{\mathbf{applied}}$  is

horizontal, and  $\mathbf{F}_{\text{friction}}$  points in the

opposite direction. The two vertical

arrows are equal in length, as are the

two horizontal arrows.

and an arrow labeled **F**<sub>air</sub> should point

opposite the direction of motion. The

