---
chapter: 4
chapter_title: Forces and the Laws of Motion
section: 2
section_title: SECTION 2
---

### **SECTION 2**



> **[Preview Vocabulary]**
>
> Latin Word Origins The root of inertia comes from Latin. The root word can mean "idleness," "unskilled," or "inactive." *Inertia* has the same root word as the term inert, a word used in chemistry to describe something that is chemically inactive. The Group 18 elements, such as neon and argon, are sometimes called the inert gases.
>

### **Teach** ▼


> **[Demonstration]**
>
> Purpose Help students develop a kinesthetic sense of inertia.
>
> Materials physics book, calculator **Procedure** Tell students that they will
>
> be able to feel the effects of inertia. First, tell them to hold the physics book upright between their hands, palms facing inward. Have them move the book from side to side (oscillating a distance of 30 cm) at regular time intervals. Tell the students to note the effort involved in changing the motion of the book. Repeat the demonstration with the calculator and have students note the much smaller effort required.
>

### **▼ Teach** continued

### QuickLab

#### **TEACHER'S NOTES**

If students have trouble keeping the ball in place while accelerating the skateboard, they can tape a wooden block onto the skateboard to keep the ball from rolling off the back. Students should recognize that when the skateboard hits the wall, the ball continues moving forward due to its inertia.

net force a single force whose external effects on a rigid body are the same as the effects of several actual forces acting on the body

#### The sum of forces acting on an object is the net force.

Consider a car traveling at a constant velocity. Newton's first law tells us that the net external force on the car must be equal to zero. However, Figure 2.2 shows that many forces act on a car in motion. The vector  $\mathbf{F}_{forward}$ represents the forward force of the road on the tires. The vector  $\mathbf{F}_{resistance'}$ which acts in the opposite direction, is due partly to friction between the road surface and tires and is due partly to air resistance. The vector  $\boldsymbol{F}_{gravity}$ represents the downward gravitational force on the car, and the vector  $\boldsymbol{F_{ground\text{-}on\text{-}car}}$  represents the upward force that the road exerts on the car.

To understand how a car under the influence of so many forces can maintain a constant velocity, you must understand the distinction between external force and net external force. An external force is a single force that acts on an object as a result of the interaction between the object and its environment. All four forces in Figure 2.2 are external forces acting on the car. The **net force** is the vector sum of all forces acting on an object.

When many forces act on an object, it may move in a particular direction with a particular velocity and acceleration. The net force is the force, which when acting alone, produces exactly the same change in motion. When all external forces acting on an object are known, the net force can be found by using the methods for finding resultant vectors. Although four forces are acting on the car in Figure 2.2, the car will maintain a constant velocity if the vector sum of these forces is equal to zero.

#### Mass is a measure of inertia.

Imagine a basketball and a bowling ball at rest side by side on the ground. Newton's first law states that both balls remain at rest as long as no net external force acts on them. Now, imagine supplying a net force by pushing each ball. If the two are pushed with equal force, the basketball will accelerate more than the bowling ball. The bowling ball experiences a smaller acceleration because it has more inertia than the basketball.

As the example of the bowling ball and the basketball shows, the inertia of an object is proportional to the object's mass. The greater the mass of a body, the less the body accelerates under an applied force. Similarly, a light object undergoes a larger acceleration than does a heavy object under the same force. Therefore, mass, which is a measure of the amount of matter in an object, is also a measure of the inertia of an object.

Place a small ball on the rear end in place. Observe what happens of a skateboard or cart. Push the to the ball when the skateboard skateboard across the floor and hits the wall. Can you explain your observation in terms of into a wall. You may need to either hold the ball in place while pushinertia? Repeat the procedure ing the skateboard up to speed or using balls with different masses accelerate the skateboard slowly and compare the results. so that friction holds the ball

#### MATERIALS

- skatehoard or cart
- · toy balls with various masses

Perform this experiment away from walls and furniture that can be damaged.

### **Problem Solving**

#### TAKE IT FURTHER

During liftoff, astronauts on a space shuttle experience tremendous forces. Challenge students to research the forces that act on astronauts as they lift off the launch pad and leave Earth's atmosphere. Ask students to choose one segment of the astronauts' path and create a drawing illustrating the net forces working at that point in time. Suggest that students research education websites hosted by NASA in order to get started.

#### **Determining Net Force**

Sample Problem B Derek leaves his physics book on top of a drafting table that is inclined at a 35° angle. The free-body diagram at right shows the forces acting on the book. Find the net force acting on the book.

#### **ANALYZE**

Define the problem, and identify the variables.

Given:

$$F_{gravity-on-book} = F_g = 22 \text{ N}$$

$$\begin{split} F_{friction} &= F_f = 11 \text{ N} \\ F_{table-on-book} &= F_t = 18 \text{ N} \end{split}$$

 $F_{gravity-on-book} = 22 \text{ N}$ 

 $F_{table-on-book} = 18 \text{ N}$ 

F<sub>friction</sub>= 11 N

### **Tips and Tricks**

To simplify the problem, always choose the coordinate system in which as many forces as possible lie on the x- and y-axes.

Select a coordinate system, and apply it to the free-body diagram.

Choose the x-axis parallel to and the y-axis perpendicular to the incline of the table, as shown in (a). This coordinate system is the most convenient because only one force needs to be resolved into x and y components.

#### PLAN Find the x and y components of all vectors.

Draw a sketch, as shown in (b), to help find the components of the vector **Fg**. The angle  $\theta$  is equal to  $180^{\circ} - 90^{\circ} - 35^{\circ} = 55^{\circ}$ .

$$\cos \theta = \frac{F_{g,x}}{F_g}$$

$$\sin\theta = \frac{F_{g,y}}{F_{\sigma}}$$

$$F_{g,x} = F_g \cos \theta$$

$$F_{g,y} = F_g \sin \theta$$

$$F_{g,x} = (22 \text{ N})(\cos 55^\circ) = 13 \text{ N}$$

$$F_{g,y} = (22 \text{ N})(\sin 55^\circ) = 18 \text{ N}$$

Add both components to the free-body diagram, as shown in (c).

(c) 22 N

(e)

#### **3** SOLVE

#### Find the net force in both the x and y directions.

Diagram (d) shows another free-body diagram of the book, now with forces acting only along the x- and y-axes.

For the *x* direction:

$$\Sigma F_x = F_{g,x} - F_f$$
  
$$\Sigma F_x = 13 \text{ N} - 11 \text{ N} = 2 \text{ N}$$

$$\Sigma F_y = F_t - F_{g,y}$$
  
$$\Sigma F_y = 18 \text{ N} - 18 \text{ N} = 0 \text{ N}$$

#### Find the net force.

Add the net forces in the x and y directions together as vectors to find the total net force. In this case,  $\mathbf{F}_{net} = 2 \text{ N}$ in the +x direction, as shown in (e). Thus, the book accelerates down the incline.

#### **CHECK YOUR** WORK

The box should accelerate down the incline, so the answer is reasonable

Continued

Forces and the Laws of Motion

#### 125

#### **ALTERNATIVE APPROACHES**

For free-body diagrams, it sometimes helps to try a different arrangement of the vectors. Show students that, by arranging the force vectors on the coordinate system in such a way that more vectors lie on one of the axes, there will be fewer vectors to resolve into components. As a result, calculating the solution will take fewer steps.

#### **Classroom Practice**

#### **DETERMINING NET FORCE**

An agriculture student is designing a support to keep a tree upright. Two wires have been attached to the tree and placed at right angles to each other. One wire exerts a force of 30.0 N on the tree: the other wire exerts a 40.0 N force. Determine where to place a third wire and how much force it should exert so that the net force acting on the tree is equal to zero.

**Answer**: 50.0 N at 143° from the 40.0 N force and at 127° from the 30.0 N force

A flying, stationary kite is acted on by a force of 9.8 N downward. The wind exerts a force of 45 N at an angle of 50.0° above the horizontal. Find the force that the string exerts on the kite.

Answer: 38 N. 40° below the horizontal

### **▼ Teach** continued

#### **Answers**

#### Practice B

- **1.**  $F_y = 60.6 \text{ N}$ ;  $F_y = 35.0 \text{ N}$
- 2. 2.48 N at 25.0° counterclockwise from straight down
- **3.** 557 N at 35.7° west of north

#### PROBLEM GUIDE B

Use this guide to assign problems.

**SE** = Student Edition Textbook

**PW** = Sample Problem Set I (online)

**PB** = Sample Problem Set II (online)

#### **Solving for:**

| $F_x$ , $F_y$    | SE | Sample, 1;<br>Ch. Rvw. 11–12      |
|------------------|----|-----------------------------------|
|                  | PW | 3, 4*, 5*                         |
|                  | РВ | 7–10                              |
| F <sub>net</sub> | SE | Sample, 2–3;<br>Ch. Rvw. 10, 22a* |
|                  | PW | Sample, 1–2                       |
|                  | РВ | 1–6                               |

#### \*Challenging Problem

### Why It Matters

Scientists have determined that the body adjusts its stride to changes in inertia differently than it adjusts to changes in weight. Point out that this experiment suggests that changing inertia (mass) does not increase the net force on runners in microgravity. Ask students to think about resistance training and list ways that astronauts could replace the resistance of gravity while in space. Then explain that astronauts use bungee cords to replace the resistance of gravity during exercise. However, bungees replace only about 60% of the astronauts' weight on Earth.

#### **Determining Net Force** (continued)

#### **Practice**

#### **Tips and Tricks**

If there is a net force in both the x and v directions, use vector addition to find the total net force.

- 1. A man is pulling on his dog with a force of  $70.0 \, \mathrm{N}$  directed at an angle of  $+30.0^{\circ}$  to the horizontal. Find the *x* and *y* components of this force.
- 2. A gust of wind blows an apple from a tree. As the apple falls, the gravitational force on the apple is 2.25 N downward, and the force of the wind on the apple is 1.05 N to the right. Find the magnitude and direction of the net force on the apple.
- 3. The wind exerts a force of 452 N north on a sailboat, while the water exerts a force of 325 N west on the sailboat. Find the magnitude and direction of the net force on the sailboat.

#### WHY IT MATTERS

# **Astronaut Workouts**

ravity helps to keep bones strong. Loss of bone density is a serious outcome of time spent in space. Astronauts routinely exercise on treadmills to counteract the effects of microgravity on their skeletal systems. But is it possible to increase the value of their workouts by increasing their mass? And does it matter if they run or walk?

A team of scientists recruited runners to help find out. The runners used treadmills that measured the net force on their legs, or ground reaction force, while they ran and walked. The runners' inertia was changed by adding masses to a weighted vest. A spring system supported them as they exercised. Although the spring system did not simulate weightless conditions, it kept their weight the same even as their inertia was changed by the added mass. This mimicked the situation in Earth orbit, where a change in mass does not result in a change in weight.

The scientists were surprised to discover that ground reaction force did not increase with mass while the subjects were running. Ground reaction force did increase with mass while the subjects were walking. But overall, ground reaction force for running was still greater. So astronauts still need to run, not walk-and they can't shorten their workouts by carrying more mass.

### **Problem Solving**

#### TAKE IT FURTHER

After solving Practice B(1), ask students to find the net force of the x and y components. The net force on the x component is 9.4 N and the net force on the y component is 35 N. Such extension of the problem can be considered as the evaluation method.

#### Equilibrium

Objects that are either at rest or moving with constant velocity are said to be in equilibrium. Newton's first law describes objects in equilibrium, whether they are at rest or moving with a constant velocity. Newton's first law states one condition that must be true for equilibrium: the net force acting on a body in equilibrium must be equal to zero.

equilibrium the state in which the net force on an object is zero

The net force on the fishing bob in Figure 2.3(a) is equal to zero because the bob is at rest. Imagine that a fish bites the bait, as shown in Figure 2.3(b). Because a net force is acting on the line, the bob accelerates toward the hooked fish.

Now, consider a different scenario. Suppose that at the instant the fish begins pulling on the line, the person reacts by applying a force to the bob that is equal and opposite to the force exerted by the fish. In this case, the net force on the bob remains zero, as shown in Figure 2.3(c), and the bob remains at rest. In this example, the bob is at rest while in equilibrium, but an object can also be in equilibrium while moving at a constant velocity.

An object is in equilibrium when the vector sum of the forces acting on the object is equal to zero. To determine whether a body is in equilibrium, find the net force, as shown in Sample Problem B. If the net force is zero, the body is in equilibrium. If there is a net force, a second force equal and opposite to this net force will put the body in equilibrium.


> **[Formative Assessment]**
>

#### Reviewing Main Ideas

- 1. If a car is traveling westward with a constant velocity of 20 m/s, what is the net force acting on the car?
- 2. If a car is accelerating downhill under a net force of 3674 N, what additional force would cause the car to have a constant velocity?
- 3. The sensor in the torso of a crash-test dummy records the magnitude and direction of the net force acting on the dummy. If the dummy is thrown forward with a force of 130.0 N while simultaneously being hit from the side with a force of 4500.0 N, what force will the sensor report?
- 4. What force will the seat belt have to exert on the dummy in item 3 to hold the dummy in the seat?

#### Critical Thinking

5. Can an object be in equilibrium if only one force acts on the object?


> **[Answers to Section Assessment]**
>
>
> - **1.** zero
> - **2.** -3674 N
> - **3.** 4502 N at 1.655° forward of the side
> - **4.** the same magnitude as the net force in item 3 but in the opposite direction
> - **5.** No, either no force or two or more forces are required for equilibrium.
>

#### **TEACH FROM VISUALS**

**FIGURE 2.3** Point out that in order for the bob to be in equilibrium, all the forces must cancel. You may want to diagram this situation on the board and include the force of the water on the bob (buoyant force).

**Ask** Other than the forces applied by the person and the fish, do any other forces act on the bob?

**Answer**: yes, the upward (buoyant) force of the water on the bob and the downward gravitational force

### **Assess and Reteach**

**Assess** Use the Formative Assessment on this page to evaluate student mastery of the section.

**Reteach** For students who need additional instruction, download the Section Study Guide.

**Response to Intervention** To reassess students' mastery, use the Section Quiz, available to print or to take directly online at **HMDScience.com**.

Forces and the Laws of Motion **127**


### **▼ Plan and Prepare**


> **[Preview Vocabulary]**
>
> Scientific Meanings In everyday speech, the word *law* usually refers to a system of rules established by a government for the behavior of humans and their organizations. Inherent in this meaning is the idea that people can disobey the law and that certain behaviors are illegal or against the law. Explain to students that a *scientific law* describes events in the natural world that always occur in the same way, each time the events are observed. It is not possible to break a scientific law in the same sense that a human law can be broken.
>

### **▼** Teach


> **[Demonstration]**
>

#### **MASS AND ACCELERATION**

**Purpose** Visualize the acceleration of objects with different masses.

**Materials** balls of similar diameter but different mass, such as a Styrofoam ball, rubber ball, and large steel ball bearing

Procedure Place the balls in a row near one edge of a long table. Invite a student to accelerate each ball by hitting it with a forefinger *gently* flicked off a thumb. Ask students to observe the distance each ball moves. Point out that, although the force used on each ball is roughly the same, the balls with greater mass do not roll as far as the ones with lesser mass. (If results are not as expected, discuss friction between the surface of the balls and the table as an additional force acting on the balls.)


#### Dbiectives

Describe an object's acceleration in terms of its mass and the net force acting on it.

Predict the direction and magnitude of the acceleration caused by a known net force.

Identify action-reaction pairs.

# **Newton's Second** and Third Laws

#### **Newton's Second Law**

From Newton's first law, we know that an object with no net force acting on it is in a state of equilibrium. We also know that an object experiencing a net force undergoes a change in its velocity. But exactly how much does a known force affect the motion of an object?

#### Force is proportional to mass and acceleration.

Imagine pushing a stalled car through a level intersection, as shown in Figure 3.1. Because a net force causes an object to accelerate, the speed of the car will increase. When you push the car by yourself, however, the acceleration will be so small that it will take a long time for you to notice an increase in the car's speed. If you get several friends to help you, the net force on the car is much greater, and the car will soon be moving so fast that you will have to run to keep up with it. This change happens because the acceleration of an object is directly proportional to the net force acting on the object. (Note that this is an idealized example that disregards any friction forces that would hinder the motion. In reality, the car accelerates when the push is greater than the frictional force. However, when the force exerted by the pushers equals the frictional force, the net force becomes zero, and the car moves at a constant velocity.)

Experience reveals that the mass of an object also affects the object's acceleration. A lightweight car accelerates more than a heavy truck if the same force is applied to both. Thus, it requires less force to accelerate a low-mass object than it does to accelerate a high-mass object at the same rate.

#### FIGURE 3.1

Relationship Between Force and Acceleration (a) A small force on an object causes a small acceleration, but (b) a larger force causes a larger acceleration.

(b)



> **[Differentiated Instruction — Inclusion]**
>
> Tactile learners might benefit from a quick activity to demonstrate Newton's second law. Provide small groups of students with a spring scale and a 1-kg mass. Ask students to demonstrate a force of 1 N using the spring scale. Students should recall that 1 N is equal to the force needed to accelerate a 1-kg mass 1 m/s².
>
> Ask students to explain how they know how much force was needed to accelerate the mass. They should recognize that they need to read the spring scale to get that information. Ask students how they could increase the acceleration of the mass. They would need to add more mass. Emphasize for the students that this demonstrates the relationship between **F**, *m*, and **a**: force is equal to the mass times the acceleration.
>
> (bl), (br) ©Houghton Mifflin Harcourt
>

#### Newton's second law relates force, mass, and acceleration.

The relationships between mass, force, and acceleration are quantified in Newton's second law.

#### **Newton's Second Law**

The acceleration of an object is directly proportional to the net force acting on the object and inversely proportional to the object's mass.

According to Newton's second law, if equal forces are applied to two objects of different masses, the object with greater mass will experience a smaller acceleration, and the object with less mass will experience a greater acceleration.

In equation form, we can state Newton's law as follows:

#### **Newton's Second Law**

 $\Sigma \mathbf{F} = m\mathbf{a}$  $net force = mass \times acceleration$ 

In this equation, **a** is the acceleration of the object and *m* is the object's mass. Note that  $\Sigma$  is the Greek capital letter  $\mathit{sigma}$ , which represents the sum of the quantities that come after it. In this case,  $\Sigma \mathbf{F}$  represents the vector sum of all external forces acting on the object, or the net force.

#### **Newton's Second Law**

**Interactive** Demo HMDScience.com

Sample Problem C Roberto and Laura are studying across from each other at a wide table. Laura slides a 2.2 kg book toward Roberto. If the net force acting on the book is 1.6 N to the right, what is the book's acceleration?

ANALYZE

m = 2.2 kgGiven:

 $\mathbf{F}_{\mathbf{net}} = \Sigma \mathbf{F} = 1.6 \,\mathrm{N}$  to the right

Unknown:

SOLVE

Use Newton's second law, and solve for a.

$$\Sigma \mathbf{F} = m\mathbf{a}$$
, so  $\mathbf{a} = \frac{\Sigma \mathbf{F}}{m}$ 

$$a = \frac{1.6 \text{ N}}{2.2 \text{ kg}} = 0.73 \text{ m/s}^2$$

 $\mathbf{a} = 0.73 \,\mathrm{m/s^2}$  to the right

#### **Tips and Tricks**

If more than one force is acting on an object, you must find the net force as shown in Sample Problem B before applying Newton's second law. The acceleration will be in the direction of the net force.

Continued

### **Problem Solving**

Forces and the Laws of Motion

129

#### **DECONSTRUCTING PROBLEMS**

When solving problems of Newton's second law, encourage students to begin by writing the formula  $\Sigma \mathbf{F} = m\mathbf{a}$ . They should then read through the problem and identify the variables that they have been given. Work through Sample Problem C with the students. Point out that they know the force and the mass. They need to solve for the acceleration.

Call attention to the need to rearrange the equation to solve for acceleration, as shown in the Sample Problem. They can then plug in the numbers that they have and solve for acceleration. Students who have difficulty seeing why the rearranged equation is equivalent will benefit from seeing the division and cancellation of mass:

$$\Sigma \mathbf{F} = m\mathbf{a}$$
  $\frac{\Sigma \mathbf{F}}{m} = \frac{m\mathbf{a}}{m}$   $\mathbf{a} = \frac{\Sigma \mathbf{F}}{m}$ 

### **Classroom Practice**

#### **NEWTON'S SECOND LAW**

Space-shuttle astronauts experience accelerations of about 35 m/s<sup>2</sup> during takeoff. What force does a 75-kg astronaut experience during an acceleration of this magnitude?

#### Answer: 2600 N

An 8.5-kg bowling ball initially at rest is dropped from the top of an 11-m building. The ball hits the ground 1.5 s later. Find the net force on the falling ball.

**Answer**: 83 N

#### PROBLEM GUIDE C

Use this guide to assign problems.

**SE** = Student Edition Textbook

**PW** = Sample Problem Set I (online)

**PB** = Sample Problem Set II (online)

#### Solving for:

| . 8       |    |                                                                  |
|-----------|----|------------------------------------------------------------------|
| a         | SE | Sample, 1–3; Ch.<br>Rvw. 20, 22b*, 42a,<br>44a, 45a*, 48a*       |
|           | PW | 2b, 9-11, 12*, 13b*, 14b                                         |
|           | РВ | 7–10                                                             |
| $F_{net}$ | SE | 5*; Ch. Rvw. 19, 21, 40*,<br>41, 42b*, 43, 44b, 45a*,<br>50*, 51 |
|           | PW | Sample, 1–2a, 3–5, 6*, 7*, 8*, 13a*                              |
|           | РВ | 4-6                                                              |
| m         | SE | 4                                                                |
|           | PW | 14a                                                              |
|           | РВ | Sample, 1–3                                                      |

\*Challenging Problem

### **▼ Teach** continued

#### **Answers**

#### Practice C

- 1.  $2.2 \text{ m/s}^2$  forward
- 2. 1.4 m/s<sup>2</sup> north
- **3.**  $4.50 \text{ m/s}^2$  to the east
- **4.** 2.1 kg
- **5.** 14 N

#### **Answers**

#### **Conceptual Challenge**

- 1. A greater force acts on the heavier rock, but the heavier rock also has greater mass, so the acceleration is the same. Free-fall acceleration is independent of mass.
- 2. The acceleration will increase as the mass decreases.

#### Newton's Second Law (continued)

#### Practice

#### **Tips and Tricks**

For some problems, it may be easier to use the equation for Newton's second law twice: once for all of the forces acting in the x direction  $(\Sigma F_x = ma_x)$  and once for all of the forces acting in the x direction  $(\Sigma F_x = ma_x)$  and once for all of the forces acting in the y direction  $(\Sigma F_y = ma_y)$ . If the net force in both directions is zero, then a = 0, which corresponds to the equilibrium situation in which v is either constant or zero.

- 1. The net force on the propeller of a 3.2 kg model airplane is 7.0 N forward. What is the acceleration of the airplane?
- 2. The net force on a golf cart is 390 N north. If the cart has a total mass of 270 kg, what are the magnitude and direction of the cart's acceleration?
- **3.** A car has a mass of  $1.50 \times 10^3$  kg. If the force acting on the car is  $6.75 \times 10^3$  N to the east, what is the car's acceleration?
- **4.** A soccer ball kicked with a force of 13.5 N accelerates at 6.5 m/s<sup>2</sup> to the right. What is the mass of the hall?
- **5.** A 2.0 kg otter starts from rest at the top of a muddy incline 85 cm long and slides down to the bottom in 0.50 s. What net force acts on the otter along the incline?

#### **Newton's Third Law**

A force is exerted on an object when that object interacts with another object in its environment. Consider a moving car colliding with a concrete barrier. The car exerts a force on the barrier at the moment of collision. Furthermore, the barrier exerts a force on the car so that the car rapidly slows down after coming into contact with the barrier. Similarly, when your hand applies a force to a door to push it open, the door simultaneously exerts a force back on your hand.

#### Forces always exist in pairs.

From examples like those discussed in the previous paragraph, Newton recognized that a single isolated force cannot exist. Instead, forces always exist in pairs. The car exerts a force on the barrier, and at the same time, the barrier exerts a force on the car. Newton described this type of situation with his third law of motion.

#### Conceptual Challenge

1. Gravity and Rocks The force due to gravity is twice as great on a 2 kg rock as it is on a 1 kg rock. Why doesn't the 2 kg rock have a greater free-fall acceleration?

2. Leaking Truck A truck loaded with sand accelerates at 0.5 m/s<sup>2</sup> on the highway. If the driving force on the truck remains constant, what happens to the truck's acceleration if sand leaks at a constant rate from a hole in the truck bed?


> **[Differentiated Instruction — English Learners]**
>
> English learners will benefit from careful attention to the meaning of each word in the statement of Newton's third law. Walk through the statement of the law, asking students to restate key words using simpler language. For example, here is the third law with the terms interact, magnitude, exerted, simultaneously, and opposite redefined:
>
> "If two objects interact, (have something to do with each other) the magnitude (size) of the force **exerted on** (acting on) object 1 by object 2 is equal to the magnitude (size) of the force simultaneously exerted (acting at the same time) on object 2 by object 1, and these two forces are opposite in direction (push against each other)."
>

#### Newton's Third Law

**If two objects interact, the magnitude of the force exerted on object 1 by object 2 is equal to the magnitude of the force simultaneously exerted on object 2 by object 1, and these two forces are opposite in direction.**

An alternative statement of this law is that *for every action, there is an equal and opposite reaction*. When two objects interact with one another, the forces that the objects exert on each other are called an *actionreaction pair*. The force that object 1 exerts on object 2 is sometimes called the *action force*, while the force that object 2 exerts on object 1 is called the *reaction force*. The action force is equal in magnitude and opposite in direction to the reaction force. The terms *action* and *reaction* sometimes cause confusion because they are used a little differently in physics than they are in everyday speech. In everyday speech, the word *reaction* is used to refer to something that happens *after* and *in response to* an event. In physics, however, the reaction force occurs at ex actly the same time as the action force.

Because the action and reaction forces coexist, either force can be called the action or the reaction. For example, you could call the force that the car exerts on the barrier the action and the force that the barrier exerts on the car the reaction. Likewise, you could choose to call the force that the barrier exerts on the car the action and the force that the car exerts on the barrier the reaction.

#### Action and reaction forces each act on different objects.

One important thing to remember about action-reaction pairs is that each force acts on a different object. Consider the task of driving a nail into wood, as illustrated in Figure 3.2. To accelerate the nail and drive it into the wood, the hammer exerts a force on the nail. According to Newton's third law, the nail exerts a force on the hammer that is equal to the magnitude of the force that the hammer exerts on the nail.

The concept of action-reaction pairs is a common source of confusion because some people assume incorrectly that the equal and opposite forces balance one another and make any change in the state of motion impossible. If the force that the nail exerts on the hammer is equal to the force the hammer exerts on the nail, why doesn't the nail remain at rest?

The motion of the nail is affected only by the forces acting on the nail. To determine whether the nail will accelerate, draw a free-body diagram to isolate the forces acting on the nail, as shown in Figure 3.3. The force of the nail on the hammer is not included in the diagram because it does not act on the nail. According to the diagram, the nail will be driven into the wood because there is a net force acting on the nail. Thus, actionreaction pairs do not imply that the net force on either object is zero. The action-reaction forces are equal and opposite, but either object may still have a net force acting on it.

#### FIGURE 3.2

#### Forces on a Hammer and

Nail The force that the nail exerts on the hammer is equal and opposite to the force that the hammer exerts on the nail.

### **Fhammer-on-nail Fwood-on-nail** FIGURE3.3 Net Force on a Hammer The net force acting on the nail drives the nail into the wood.



> **[Misconception Alert]**
>
> It is important to clear up any misconception that action and reaction forces cancel each other. One way to reinforce the true nature of Newton's third law is to use free-body diagrams. On the board, draw separate free-body diagrams for two or more interacting objects, such as a book on a table. Identify the pairs of forces and point out that the force arrows are on separate bodies. The motion of the book is affected only by forces on the book. The motion of the table is affected only by forces on the table. Have students practice drawing free-body diagrams for multiple objects, building up levels of complexity with each new diagram (for example, a book on an inclined plane on a table on Earth).
>

### **▼** Assess and Reteach

**Assess** Use the Formative Assessment on this page to evaluate student mastery of the section.

**Reteach** For students who need additional instruction, download the Section Study Guide.

**Response to Intervention** To reassess students' mastery, use the Section Quiz, available to print or to take directly online at **HMDScience.com**.

#### Field forces also exist in pairs.

Newton's third law also applies to field forces. For example, consider the gravitational force exerted by Earth on an object. During calibration at the crash-test site, engineers calibrate the sensors in the heads of crash-test dummies by removing the heads and dropping them from a known height.

The force that Earth exerts on a dummy's head is  $\mathbf{F_g}$ . Let's call this force the action. What is the reaction? Because  $\mathbf{F_g}$  is the force exerted on the falling head by Earth, the reaction to  $\mathbf{F_g}$  is the force exerted on Earth by the falling head.

According to Newton's third law, the force of the dummy on Earth is equal to the force of Earth on the dummy. Thus, as a falling object accelerates toward Earth, Earth also accelerates toward the object.

The thought that Earth accelerates toward the dummy's head may seem to contradict our experience. One way to make sense of this idea is to refer to Newton's second law. The mass of Earth is much greater than that of the dummy's head. Therefore, while the dummy's head undergoes a large acceleration due to the force of Earth, the acceleration of Earth due to this reaction force is negligibly small because of Earth's enormous mass.


> **[Formative Assessment]**
>

#### Reviewing Main Ideas

- 1. A 6.0 kg object undergoes an acceleration of 2.0 m/s<sup>2</sup>.
  - a. What is the magnitude of the net force acting on the object?
  - **b.** If this same force is applied to a 4.0 kg object, what acceleration is produced?
- A child causes a wagon to accelerate by pulling it with a horizontal force. Newton's third law says that the wagon exerts an equal and opposite force on the child. How can the wagon accelerate? (Hint: Draw a free-body diagram for each object.)
- 3. Identify the action-reaction pairs in the following situations:
  - a. A person takes a step.
  - b. A snowball hits someone in the back.
  - c. A baseball player catches a ball.
  - d. A gust of wind strikes a window.
- 4. The forces acting on a sailboat are 390 N north and 180 N east. If the boat (including crew) has a mass of 270 kg, what are the magnitude and direction of the boat's acceleration?

#### **Oritical Thinking**

5. If a small sports car collides head-on with a massive truck, which vehicle experiences the greater impact force? Which vehicle experiences the greater acceleration? Explain your answers.


> **[Answers to Section Assessment]**
>
> - **1. a.** 12 N
> - **b.**  $3.0 \text{ m/s}^2$
> - **2.** The reaction force acts on the child, not on the wagon itself, so there is still a net force on the wagon.
> - **3. a.** person pushes on ground; ground pushes on person
> - **b.** snowball exerts force on back; back exerts force on snowball
> - ball exerts force on glove; glove exerts force on ball
>
> - **d.** wind exerts force on window; window exerts force on wind
> - **4.** 1.6 m/s<sup>2</sup> at an angle of 65° north of east
> - 5. Each impact force has the same magnitude. The sports car experiences the larger acceleration because it has a smaller mass, and acceleration is inversely proportional to mass.
>

# **Everyday Forces**

#### **Key Terms**

normal force

static friction kinetic friction coefficient of friction

#### Weight

How do you know that a bowling ball weighs more than a tennis ball? If you imagine holding one ball in each hand, you can imagine the downward forces acting on your hands. Because the bowling ball has more mass than the tennis ball does, gravitational force pulls more strongly on the bowling ball. Thus, the bowling ball pushes your hand down with more force than the tennis ball does.

The gravitational force exerted on the ball by Earth,  $\mathbf{F_{g'}}$  is a vector quantity, directed toward the center of Earth. The magnitude of this force,  $F_{g}$ , is a scalar quantity called weight. The weight of an object can be calculated using the equation  $F_g = ma_{g'}$  where  $a_g$  is the magnitude of the acceleration due to gravity, or free-fall acceleration. On the surface of Earth,  $a_g = g$ , and  $F_g = mg$ . In this book, g = 9.81 m/s<sup>2</sup> unless otherwise specified.

Weight, unlike mass, is not an inherent property of an object. Because it is equal to the magnitude of the force due to gravity, weight depends on location. For example, if the astronaut in Figure 4.1 weighs 800 N (180 lb) on Earth, he would weigh only about 130 N (30 lb) on the moon. The value of  $a_g$  on the surface of a planet depends on the planet's mass and radius. On the moon,  $a_g$  is about 1.6 m/s<sup>2</sup>—much smaller than 9.81 m/s<sup>2</sup>.

Even on Earth, an object's weight may vary with location. Objects weigh less at higher altitudes than they do at sea level because the value of  $a_{g}$  decreases as distance from the surface of Earth increases. The value of  $a_{\sigma}$  also varies slightly with changes in latitude.

