---
chapter: 5
chapter_title: Work and Energy
section: 1
section_title: SECTION 1 Work KEY TERM • Work is done on an object only when a net force acts on the object to displace it in the direction of a component of the net force. • The amount of work done on an object by a force is equal to the component of the force along the direction of motion times the distance the object moves. work SECTION 2 Energy KEY TERMS • Objects in motion have kinetic energy because of their mass and speed. • The net work done on or by an object is equal to the change in the kinetic energy of the object. • Potential energy is energy associated with an object's position. Two forms of potential energy discussed in this chapter are gravitational potential energy and elastic potential energy. kinetic energy work–kinetic energy theorem potential energy gravitational potential energy elastic potential energy spring constant
---

# CHAPTER 5

### **Chapter Overview**

**Section 1** introduces work and shows calculations of the work done in a variety of situations.

**Section 2** identifies and shows calculations using kinetic energy, the work-kinetic energy theorem, and different types of potential energy.

**Section 3** explores the conditions necessary for conservation of mechanical energy and applies this principle to problem solving.

**Section 4** introduces the relationships among work, time, power, force, and

### About the Image

This audiokinetic sculpture was created by George Rhoads, whose sculptures can be seen at the Boston Museum of Science, at the Port Authority Bus Terminal in New York City, and in various shopping centers. After completing the chapter, have students return to this photograph and apply the concepts of work and the conservation of energy to describe which balls have mostly potential energy and which have mostly kinetic energy.

The following investigations support the concepts presented in this chapter.

Exploring Work and Energy Loss of Mechanical Energy (Probeware) Conservation of Mechanical Energy (Probeware) Conservation of Mechanical Energy (Core Skill) Work (Open Inquiry) Power Programming (STEM)

#### **QUICKLAB**

Mechanical Energy

#### **DEMONSTRATIONS**

Work **Quantifying Work** Potential Energy Mechanical Energy Conservation of Energy

### Focus and Motivate ▼

### **Activate Prior Knowledge**

#### **KNOWLEDGE TO REVIEW**

- Review the kinematic equations.
- Newton's second law states that force = mass  $\times$  acceleration ( $\mathbf{F} = m\mathbf{a}$ ).
- Kinetic friction is a resistive force exerted on a moving body by its environment.

#### **ITEMS TO PROBE**

- Familiarity with phenomena of energy transformation: Ask students to describe the action of jumping up and down on a trampoline in terms of energy.
- Preconceptions about energy dissipation: Ask students if energy is ever lost in a process.

#### **CONNECTING TO BIOLOGY**

In physics, work is done when energy is transferred to or from an object by force. This work is made possible by a variety of energy sources, including both kinetic and potential energy. In biology, work can be defined as any process carried out by an organism, whether it is carried out at the cellular level or by the entire organism. Organisms continuously use energy to do work, and this work is made possible by chemical energy.

Examples of work in biological systems include a cheetah running after its prey or a chimpanzee picking up a banana. Less obvious examples include the digestion of food or the transport of materials into and out of cells. Every moment, our bodies use energy to survive. Even when we are sleeping, our bodies are doing work.

After briefly discussing the biological definition of work, ask students how the definition of work in biology is related to the definition in physics. Where is work being done when food is digested? In the digestive



> **[Preview Vocabulary]**
>
> **Academic Vocabulary** *Work* is a term that has both a common-use definition and a formal science definition. In everyday English, the word *work* is used to describe efforts directed toward producing or accomplishing something, whether it is solving a problem in mathematics or in life. But in physics, the word takes a different and specific meaning. In physics, work is not done unless an object is moved as a result of the action of a force.
>

### **Teach**


> **[Demonstration]**
>

#### **Work**

**Purpose** Determine whether work is done in various situations.

**Materials** teacher's text, spring scale, string

**Procedure** Hang the textbook from the scale with the string. Hold the book stationary, have the students note the scale reading, and record the weight (*mg*) of the book. Ask the students if the spring is exerting a force on the book. Yes, the spring exerts a force on the book that is equal to and opposite the book's weight. Ask students if the spring is doing work on the book, which is being held in a fixed position. No, because the displacement of the book is zero.

Now lift the book by pulling up on the spring at a constant velocity and have the students note the scale reading. Again ask the students if the spring is doing work on the book. Yes, the force of the lifting, equal in magnitude to the weight of the book, is upward, and the displacement is upward. Have students calculate the amount of work. m × g × h


#### Objectives

Recognize the difference between the scientific and ordinary definitions of *work*.

- Define *work* by relating it to force and displacement.
- Identify where work is being performed in a variety of situations.
- Calculate the net work done when many forces are applied to an object.

work the product of the component of a force along the direction of displacement and the magnitude of the displacement

# Work

Key Term work

#### Definition of Work

Many of the terms you have encountered so far in this book have meanings in physics that are similar to their meanings in everyday life. In its everyday sense, the term *work* means to do something that takes physical or mental effort. But in physics, work has a distinctly different meaning. Consider the following situations:

- A student holds a heavy chair at arm's length for several minutes.
- A student carries a bucket of water along a horizontal path while walking at constant velocity.

It might surprise you to know that as the term work is used in physics, there is no work done on the chair or the bucket, even though effort is required in both cases. We will return to these examples later.

#### Work is done on an object when a force causes a displacement of the object.

Imagine that your car, like the car shown in Figure 1.1, has run out of gas and you have to push it down the road to the gas station. If you push the car with a constant horizontal force, the work you do on the car is equal to the magnitude of the force, *F*, times the magnitude of the displacement of the car. Using the symbol *d* instead of ∆*x* for displacement, we define work for a constant force as

*W* = *Fd*

Work is not done on an object unless the object is moved with the action of a force. The application of a force alone does not constitute work. For this reason, no work is done on the chair when a student holds the chair at arm's length. Even though the student exerts a force to support the chair, the chair does not move. The student's tired arms suggest that work is being done, which is indeed true. The quivering muscles in the student's arms go through many small displacements and do work within the student's body. However, work is not done on the chair.

#### Work is done only when components of a force are parallel to a displacement.

When the force on an object and the object's displacement are in different directions, only the component of the force that is parallel to the object's displacement does work. Components of the force perpendicular to a displacement do not do work.

# Work Done When Pushing a Car This person exerts a constant force on the car and displaces it to the left. The work done on the car by the person is equal to the force the person exerts times the displacement of the car. FIGURE 1.1



> **[Differentiated Instruction — Below Level]**
>
> Point out that although the crate in **Figure 1.2** is a large object, you can think of all of its mass as being at the object's center. This simplifies the analysis of the situation as well as the calculations. At this point in their learning of physics, students need not be concerned with the distribution of weight or mass.
>
> For example, imagine pushing a crate along the ground. If the force you exert is horizontal, all of your effort moves the crate. If your force is at an angle, only the horizontal component of your applied force causes a displacement and contributes to the work. If the angle between the force and the direction of the displacement is  $\theta$ , as in Figure 1.2, work can be expressed as follows:
>
> $$W = Fd \cos \theta$$
>
> If  $\theta = 0^{\circ}$ , then  $\cos 0^{\circ} = 1$  and W = Fd, which is the definition of work given earlier. If  $\theta = 90^{\circ}$ , however, then  $\cos 90^{\circ} = 0$  and W = 0. So, no work is done on a bucket of water being carried by a student walking horizontally. The upward force exerted by the student to support the bucket is perpendicular to the displacement of the bucket, which results in no work done on the bucket.
>
> Finally, if many constant forces are acting on an object, you can find the net work done on the object by first finding the net force on the object.
>

#### **Net Work Done by a Constant Net Force**

$$W_{net} = F_{net} d \cos \theta$$

net force  $\times$  displacement  $\times$  cosine of the angle between them

Work has dimensions of force times length. In the SI system, work has a unit of newtons times meters (Nom), or joules (J). To give you an idea of how large a joule is, consider that the work done in lifting an apple from your waist to the top of your head is about 1 J.

#### FIGURE 1.2

**Definition of Work** The work done on this crate is equal to the force times the displacement times the cosine of the angle between them.

 $W = Fd \cos \theta$ 


> **[Did You Know?]**
>
> The joule is named for the British physicist James Prescott Joule (1818-1889). Joule made major contributions to the understanding of energy, heat, and electricity.
>

#### **Interactive** Demo Work HMDScience.com Sample Problem A How much work is done on a vacuum cleaner pulled 3.0 m by a force of 50.0 N at an angle of 30.0 $^{\circ}$ above the horizontal? **ANALYZE** Given: F = 50.0 N $\theta = 30.0^{\circ}$ d = 3.0 mUnknown: 2 SOLVE Use the equation for net work done by a constant force: $W = Fd \cos \theta$ Only the horizontal component of the applied force is doing work on the vacuum cleaner. $W = (50.0 \text{ N})(3.0 \text{ m})(\cos 30.0^{\circ})$ W = 130 J

### **Problem Solving**

Work and Energy

155

Hold the book at shoulder height and carry it across the room at a constant speed. Ask students if work is being done on the book. No, because the upward force is perpendicular to the horizontal displacement.

### **Classroom Practice**

#### WORK

A 20.0 kg suitcase is raised 3.0 m above a platform by a conveyor belt. How much work is done on the suitcase?

Answer:  $5.9 \times 10^2 \,\mathrm{J}$ 

#### PROBLEM GUIDE A

Use this guide to assign problems.

**SE** = Student Edition Textbook

**PW** = Sample Problem Set I (online)

**PB** = Sample Problem Set II (online)

#### **Solving for:**

| W                    | SE | Sample, 1–3; Ch. Rvw.<br>7–10, 45–46, 50 |
|----------------------|----|------------------------------------------|
|                      | PW | 8–11                                     |
|                      | РВ | 5–7                                      |
| F                    | SE | Ch. Rvw. 50                              |
|                      | PW | 5–7                                      |
|                      | РВ | Sample, 1–4                              |
| d                    | SE | 4                                        |
|                      | PW | Sample, 1–4                              |
|                      | РВ | 8-10                                     |
| *Challenging Problem |    |                                          |

#### **REALITY CHECK**

Review the equation for the net work done by a constant net force, making sure students understand that no net work is done on any object being moved perpendicular to its weight, regardless of the mass of the object or the distance it moves. Students should understand that the value of the cosine of 90° (0) will always result in zero net work being done.

### **▼ Teach** continued

#### **Answers**

#### **Practice A**

- **1.**  $1.50 \times 10^7 \, \text{J}$
- **2.**  $7.0 \times 10^2 \, \text{J}$
- 3.  $1.6 \times 10^3 \,\mathrm{J}$
- **4.** 1.1 m


> **[Demonstration]**
>

#### **QUANTIFYING WORK**

**Purpose** Demonstrate the relationship between the direction and the magnitude of a force.

**Materials** plastic sled or piece of cardboard, 3-m and 1-m lengths of rope

Procedure Attach both ropes to the sled, and ask a student volunteer to sit on the sled. Ask students whether it will require more force to pull the sled across the floor with the 1-m rope or with the 3-m rope. The 3-m rope will require less force. Have a student try to pull the sled with each rope and report to the class which way is easier. Sketch both situations on the board, emphasizing that the horizontal component of the force is smaller with the short rope because it is held at a greater angle above the horizontal.

#### Work (continued)

#### Practice

- 1. A tugboat pulls a ship with a constant net horizontal force of  $5.00 \times 10^3$  N and causes the ship to move through a harbor. How much work is done on the ship if it moves a distance of 3.00 km?
- 2. A weightlifter lifts a set of weights a vertical distance of 2.00 m. If a constant net force of 350 N is exerted on the weights, what is the net work done on the weights?
- **3.** A shopper in a supermarket pushes a cart with a force of 35 N directed at an angle of 25° downward from the horizontal. Find the work done by the shopper on the cart as the shopper moves along a 50.0 m length of aisle.
- 4. If 2.0 J of work is done in raising a 180 g apple, how far is it lifted?

#### The sign of work is important.

Work is a scalar quantity and can be positive or negative, as shown in Figure 1.3. Work is positive when the component of force is in the same direction as the displacement. For example, when you lift a box, the work done by the force you exert on the box is positive because that force is upward, in the same direction as the displacement.

Work is negative when the force is in the direction opposite the displacement. For example, the force of kinetic friction between a sliding box and the floor is opposite to the displacement of the box, so the work done by the force of friction on the box is negative.

If you are very careful in applying the equation for work, your answer will have the correct sign:  $\cos\theta$  is negative for angles greater than 90° but less than 270°.

#### FIGURE 1.3

done on the car

Positive and Negative Values of Work Depending on the angle, an applied force can either cause a moving car to slow down (left), which results in negative work done on the car, or speed up (right), which results in positive work



> **[Differentiated Instruction — Below Level]**
>
> Ask students how the two examples of negative work shown in **Figure 1.3** could be examples of positive work even though the force remains unchanged. Students should recognize that positive work is being done if the car moves in reverse.
>
> Ask students to explain how the examples of positive work shown in **Figure 1.3** should be changed to show negative work. Students should then understand that work is always
>
> negative when the force is opposite the direction of displacement.
>
> If the work done on an object results only in a change in the object's speed, the sign of the net work on the object tells you whether the object's speed is increasing or decreasing. If the net work is positive, the object speeds up and work is done on the object. If the net work is negative, the object slows down and work is done by the object on something else.
>

#### **SECTION 1 FORMATIVE ASSESSMENT**

#### Reviewing Main Ideas

- 1. For each of the following cases, indicate whether the work done on the second object in each example will have a positive or a negative value.
  - **a.** The road exerts a friction force on a speeding car skidding to a stop.
  - **b.** A rope exerts a force on a bucket as the bucket is raised up a well.
  - **c.** Air exerts a force on a parachute as the parachutist falls to Earth.
- 2. If a neighbor pushes a lawnmower four times as far as you do but exerts only half the force, which one of you does more work and by how much?
- **3.** A worker pushes a  $1.50 \times 10^3$  N crate with a horizontal force of 345 N a distance of 24.0 m. Assume the coefficient of kinetic friction between the crate and the floor is 0.220.
  - a. How much work is done by the worker on the crate?
  - **b.** How much work is done by the floor on the crate?
  - c. What is the net work done on the crate?
- 4. A 0.075 kg ball in a kinetic sculpture moves at a constant speed along a motorized vertical conveyor belt. The ball rises 1.32 m above the ground. A constant frictional force of 0.350 N acts in the direction opposite the conveyor belt's motion. What is the net work done on the ball?

#### Critical Thinking

- 5. For each of the following statements, identify whether the everyday or the scientific meaning of work is intended.
  - a. Jack had to work against time as the deadline neared.
  - **b.** Jill had to work on her homework before she went to bed.
  - c. Jack did work carrying the pail of water up the hill.
- **6.** Determine whether work is being done in each of the following examples:
  - a. a train engine pulling a loaded boxcar initially at rest
  - b. a tug of war that is evenly matched
  - c. a crane lifting a car


> **[Answers to Section Assessment]**
>
> 157
>
> Work and Energy
>
> - 1. a. negative
> - **b.** positive
> - c. negative
> - 2. the neighbor; twice as much
> - 3. a.  $8.28 \times 10^3$  J
> - **b.**  $-7.92 \times 10^3$  J
> - **c.**  $3.6 \times 10^2$  J
>
> - **4.** 0.00 J
> - 5. a. everyday sense
> - **b.** everyday sense
> - c. scientific sense
> - **6. a.** yes
> - **b.** no
> - c. yes
>
> **[Teaching Tip]**
>
> Write the following table on the board to help students remember the various situations that affect the sign of work.
>
> | Force is in direction of motion. | positive work |
> |----------------------------------|---------------|
> | Force opposes motion.            | negative work |
> | Force is 90° to motion.          | no work       |
> | Object is not in motion.         | no work       |
>
>
> **Assess** Use the Formative Assessment on this page to evaluate student mastery of the section.
>
> Reteach For students who need additional instruction, download the Section Study Guide.
>
> **Response to Intervention** To reassess students' mastery, use the Section Quiz, available to print or to take directly online at HMDScience.com.
>

#### SECTION 1 Work KEY TERM • Work is done on an object only when a net force acts on the object to displace it in the direction of a component of the net force. • The amount of work done on an object by a force is equal to the component of the force along the direction of motion times the distance the object moves. work SECTION 2 Energy KEY TERMS • Objects in motion have kinetic energy because of their mass and speed. • The net work done on or by an object is equal to the change in the kinetic energy of the object. • Potential energy is energy associated with an object's position. Two forms of potential energy discussed in this chapter are gravitational potential energy and elastic potential energy. kinetic energy work–kinetic energy theorem potential energy gravitational potential energy elastic potential energy spring constant

