---
chapter: 6
chapter_title: Momentum and Collisions
section: 1
section_title: SECTION 1
---

# CHAPTER 6

### **Chapter Overview**

**Section 1** defines *momentum* in terms of mass and velocity, introduces the concept of impulse, and relates impulse and momentum.

Section 2 explores the law of conservation of momentum and uses this law to predict the final velocity of an object after a collision.

Section 3 distinguishes between elastic, perfectly inelastic, and inelastic collisions and discusses whether kinetic energy is conserved in each type of collision.

### **About the Image**

Soccer is a good example to help students understand the concept of momentum and distinguish it from force, velocity, and kinetic energy. This photograph is a dramatic example of a player colliding with a ball and changing the momentum of the ball. Use this example to illustrate the vector nature of momentum; the photograph can open a discussion about how the direction as well as the magnitude of momentum is affected by the collision.

The following investigations support the concepts presented in this chapter.

Impulse and Momentum (Probeware) Conservation of Momentum Conservation of Momentum (Probeware) Collisions (Open Inquiry)

#### **OUICKLAB**

Elastic and Inelastic Collisions

#### **DEMONSTRATIONS**

Impulse Inelastic Collisions

#### **CONNECTING TO CHEMISTRY**

The concept of collision is important in chemical reactions: in fact, collisions are the basis for chemical reactions. In order for a chemical reaction to occur, the reactants must collide with enough energy and at the correct orientation in order for bonds to break. Only then can the atoms rearrange themselves to form new substances. Chemists can also use collision theory to describe why the rate for one chemical reaction differs from the rate for another one. Physicists investigate collisions not only among observable objects, such as tennis rackets and balls, but also at the molecular and subatomic levels.

After briefly explaining the relationship between collision and chemical reactions, ask students if they can explain the relationship between the rate of collisions and the rate of a chemical reaction.

### Focus and Motivate ▼

### **Activate Prior Knowledge**

#### **KNOWLEDGE TO REVIEW**

- A force on an object is a push or pull that tends to cause a change in motion. Forces can be field or contact
- Newton's laws of motion describe the effects of forces on objects and the idea that forces always exist in pairs.
- Energy of motion, called *kinetic energy*, depends on mass and speed:  $KE = \frac{1}{2}mv^2$ .
- Energy is neither created nor destroyed, but it can be converted from one form to another.

#### **ITEMS TO PROBE**

• Newton's third law: Have students draw free-body diagrams for interacting objects and identify the third law pairs.

### **SECTION 1**



> **[Preview Vocabulary]**
>
> **Latin Word Origins** The word *momentum* is borrowed directly from Latin vocabulary. Its meaning in Latin is different from its meaning in physics, however. In Latin, the word *momentum* means "movement."
>

### **Teach**

### **The Language of Physics**

As seen in previous chapters, words used in our everyday language, such as *work* and *energy*, often have precise definitions in physics. *Momentum* is another example of such a word. As with *work* and *energy*, there is a relationship between the everyday use and the scientific use of *momentum*. For example, popular ideas or trends are sometimes said to be "gaining momentum." In this case, the phrase "gaining momentum" means that an idea is gaining popularity. Ask students how this meaning compares with the meaning of *momentum* in physics. Ask students to provide other examples and compare the different meanings.


#### Objectives

Compare the momentum of different moving objects.

Compare the momentum of the same object moving with different velocities.

Identify examples of change in the momentum of an object.

Describe changes in momentum in terms of force and time.

momentum a quantity defined as the product of the mass and velocity of an object


> **[Did You Know?]**
>
> Momentum is so fundamental in Newton's mechanics that Newton called it simply "quantity of motion." The symbol for momentum, p, comes from German mathematician Gottfried Leibniz. Leibniz used the term *progress* to mean "the quantity of motion with which a body proceeds in a certain direction."
>

# Momentum and Impulse

Key Terms

momentum impulse

#### Linear Momentum

When a soccer player heads a moving ball during a game, the ball's velocity changes rapidly. After the ball is struck, the ball's speed and the direction of the ball's motion change. The ball moves across the soccer field with a different speed than it had and in a different direction than it was traveling before the collision.

The quantities and kinematic equations describing one-dimensional motion predict the motion of the ball before and after the ball is struck. The concept of force and Newton's laws can be used to calculate how the motion of the ball changes when the ball is struck. In this chapter, we will examine how the force and the duration of the collision between the ball and the soccer player affect the motion of the ball.

#### Momentum is mass times velocity.

To address such issues, we need a new concept, momentum. *Momentum* is a word we use every day in a variety of situations. In physics this word has a specific meaning. The linear momentum of an object of mass *m* moving with a velocity **v** is defined as the product of the mass and the veloc ity. Momentum is represented by the symbol **p**.

Momentum

**p** = *m***v**

**momentum** = **mass** × **velocity**

As its definition shows, momentum is a vector quantity, with its direction matching that of the velocity. Momentum has dimensions mass × length/time, and its SI units are kilogram-meters per second (kg•m/s).

If you think about some examples of the way the word *momentum* is used in everyday speech, you will see that the physics definition conveys a similar meaning. Imagine coasting down a hill of uniform slope on your bike without pedaling or using the brakes, as shown in Figure 1.1. Because of the force of gravity, you will accelerate; that is, your velocity will increase with time. This idea is often expressed by saying that you are "picking up speed" or "gathering momentum." The faster you move, the more momentum you have and the more difficult it is to come to a stop.



> **[Differentiated Instruction — Below Level]**
>
> Have students calculate the momentum of an object with a mass of 5 kg traveling at 100 m/s. Then have them calculate the momentum of an object with a mass of 100 kg traveling at 5 m/s. Explain that a small object can have a large momentum if it is moving fast enough. A large object can have no momentum if it is at rest. Ask, "Can two objects of different masses traveling at different speed have the same momentum?" Yes
>
> On the other hand, a small object moving with a very high velocity may have a larger momentum than a more massive object that is moving slowly does. For example, small hailstones falling from very high clouds can have enough momentum to hurt you or cause serious damage to cars and buildings.
>

#### FIGURE 1.1

Momentum of a Bicycle A bicycle rolling downhill has momentum. An increase in either mass or speed will increase the momentum.

**PREMIUM CONTENT**

Tips and Tricks Momentum is a vector quantity, so you must specify both its size and direction.

#### Momentum

Sample Problem A **A 2250 kg pickup truck has a velocity of 25 m/s to the east. What is the momentum of the truck?**

ANALYZE Given: *m* = 2250 kg

**v** = 25 m/s to the east

Unknown: **p** = ?

SOLVE Use the definition of momentum.

**p** = *m***v** = (2250 kg)(25 m/s east)

**p** = 5.6 × 104 kg•m/s to the east

- 1. A deer with a mass of 146 kg is running head-on toward you with a speed of 17 m/s. You are going north. Find the momentum of the deer.
- 2. A 21 kg child on a 5.9 kg bike is riding with a velocity of 4.5 m/s to the northwest.
  - a. What is the total momentum of the child and the bike together?
  - b. What is the momentum of the child?
  - c. What is the momentum of the bike?
- 3. What velocity must a 1210 kg car have in order to have the same momentum as the pickup truck in Sample Problem A?

### **Problem Solving**


#### **Take It Further**

Ask students how to find the velocity of an object when they are given its momentum. Present an experiment in which an object with a mass of 32.22 kg experiences a momentum of 82.23 kg•m/s and ask students to find the velocity of the object. Have them replace the given measures in the equation and solve 82.23 = 32.22*v* for *v*.

2.55 m/s

#### **PROBLEM guide A**

Use this guide to assign problems.

**SE** = Student Edition Textbook

**PW** = Sample Problem Set I (online)

**PB** = Sample Problem Set II (online)

#### **Solving for:**

| p | SE | Sample, 1–2;<br>Ch. Rvw. 11, 37* |  |
|---|----|----------------------------------|--|
|   | PW | 5–6                              |  |
|   | PB | 5–7                              |  |
| m | SE | Ch. Rvw. 36*                     |  |
|   | PW | Sample, 1–2                      |  |
|   | PB | 8–10                             |  |
| v | SE | Ch. Rvw. 35, 36*                 |  |
|   | PW | 3–4                              |  |
|   | PB | Sample, 1–4                      |  |
|   |    |                                  |  |

**\*Challenging Problem**

### **Answers**

#### **Practice A**

- **1.** 2.5 × 103 kg•m/s to the south
- **2. a.** 1.2 × 102 kg•m/s to the northwest
  - **b.** 94 kg•m/s to the northwest
  - **c.** 27 kg•m/s to the northwest
- **3.** 46 m/s to the east

### **▼ Teach** continued


> **[Demonstration]**
>

#### **IMPULSE**

Purpose Show that changes in momentum are caused by forces.

Materials dynamics cart

**Procedure** Have the students observe the cart at rest. Ask the students the value of the momentum of the cart when it is at rest. Zero. Now push on the cart and ask what has happened to the momentum of the cart. Its momentum has increased. How was the cart's momentum changed? An external force was applied. Stop the cart as it moves across the table. Again, ask the students how the momentum of the cart was changed. An external force was applied.

Change in Momentum When the ball is moving very fast, the player must exert a large force over a short time to change the ball's momentum and quickly bring the ball to a stop.

impulse the product of the force and the time over which the force acts on an object

#### A change in momentum takes force and time.

Figure 1.2 shows a player stopping a moving soccer ball. In a given time interval, he must exert more force to stop a fast ball than to stop a ball that is moving more slowly. Now imagine a toy truck and a real dump truck rolling across a smooth surface with the same velocity. It would take much more force to stop the massive dump truck than to stop the toy truck in the same time interval. You have probably also noticed that a ball moving very fast stings your hands when you catch it, while a slow-moving ball causes no discomfort when you catch it. The fast ball stings because it exerts more force on your hand than the slow-moving

From examples like these, we see that a change in momentum is closely related to force. In fact, when Newton first expressed his second law mathematically, he wrote it not as  $\mathbf{F} = m\mathbf{a}$ , but in the following form.

$$\mathbf{F} = \frac{\Delta \mathbf{p}}{\Delta t}$$
 force = 
$$\frac{\text{change in momentum}}{\text{time interval}}$$

We can rearrange this equation to find the change in momentum in terms of the net external force and the time interval required to make this change.

**Impulse-Momentum Theorem** 

$$\mathbf{F}\Delta t = \Delta \mathbf{p}$$
 or  $\mathbf{F}\Delta t = \Delta \mathbf{p} = m\mathbf{v_f} - m\mathbf{v_i}$ 

 $force \times time interval = change in momentum$ 

This equation states that a net external force, F, applied to an object for a certain time interval,  $\Delta t$ , will cause a change in the object's momentum equal to the product of the force and the time interval. In simple terms, a small force acting for a long time can produce the same change in momentum as a large force acting for a short time. In this book, all forces exerted on an object are assumed to be constant unless

The expression  $\mathbf{F}\Delta t = \Delta \mathbf{p}$  is called the impulse-momentum theorem. The term on the left side of the equation,  $\mathbf{F}\Delta t$ , is called the **impulse** of the force **F** for the time interval  $\Delta t$ .

The equation  $\mathbf{F}\Delta t = \Delta \mathbf{p}$  explains why proper technique is important in so many sports, from karate and billiards to softball and croquet. For example, when a batter hits a ball, the ball will experience a greater change in momentum if the batter keeps the bat in contact with the ball for a longer time. Extending the time interval over which a constant force is applied allows a smaller force to cause a greater change in momentum than would result if the force were applied for a very short time. You may have noticed this fact when pushing a full shopping cart or moving furniture.



> **[Differentiated Instruction — English Learners]**
>
> Students who are interested in sports may be familiar with the concept of "follow-through." This is the technique that is being referred to in the last paragraph on this page. Followthrough is what enables batters to keep the bat in contact with the ball for the longest time possible.
>

#### Force and Impulse

Sample Problem B A 1400 kg car moving westward with a velocity of 15 m/s collides with a utility pole and is brought to rest in 0.30 s. Find the force exerted on the car during the collision.

**ANALYZE** 

 $\mathbf{v_i} = 15 \text{ m/s}$  to the west,  $v_i = -15 \text{ m/s}$ 

 $\Delta t = 0.30 \text{ s}$ 

 $\mathbf{v_f} = 0 \, \mathrm{m/s}$ 

Unknown:

Tips and Tricks

Create a simple convention for describing the direction of vectors. For example, always use a negative speed for objects moving west or south and a positive speed for objects moving

2 SOLVE

Use the impulse-momentum theorem.

 $\mathbf{F} = ?$ 

$$\mathbf{F}\Delta t = \Delta \mathbf{p} = m\mathbf{v_f} - m\mathbf{v_i}$$

$$\mathbf{F} = \frac{m\mathbf{v_f} - m\mathbf{v_i}}{\Delta t}$$

$$\mathbf{F} = \frac{(1400 \text{ kg})(0 \text{ m/s}) - (1400 \text{ kg})(-15 \text{ m/s})}{0.30 \text{ s}} = \frac{21\ 000 \text{ kg} \cdot \text{m/s}}{0.30 \text{ s}}$$

 $\mathbf{F} = 7.0 \times 10^4 \,\mathrm{N}$  to the east

#### **Practice**

- 1. A 0.50 kg football is thrown with a velocity of 15 m/s to the right. A stationary receiver catches the ball and brings it to rest in 0.020 s. What is the force exerted on the ball by the receiver?
- 2. An 82 kg man drops from rest on a diving board 3.0 m above the surface of the water and comes to rest 0.55 s after reaching the water. What is the net force on the diver as he is brought to rest?
- 3. A 0.40 kg soccer ball approaches a player horizontally with a velocity of 18 m/s to the north. The player strikes the ball and causes it to move in the opposite direction with a velocity of 22 m/s. What impulse was delivered to the ball by the player?
- 4. A 0.50 kg object is at rest. A 3.00 N force to the right acts on the object during a time interval of 1.50 s.
  - a. What is the velocity of the object at the end of this interval?
  - **b.** At the end of this interval, a constant force of 4.00 N to the left is applied for 3.00 s. What is the velocity at the end of the 3.00 s?

### **Problem Solving**

Momentum and Collisions

193

#### TAKE IT FURTHER

Force and impulse problems provide a good opportunity to discuss conventions in physics. Stress the point that is doesn't matter how students assign positive and negative signs to vectors, as long as they do it consistently. Standard unit symbols and names are conventions used by scientists so that they can understand each other's work. Assigning a positive sign to protons and a negative sign to electrons is another example of a convention.

#### **Classroom Practice**

#### **FORCE AND IMPULSE**

Air bags are designed to protect passengers during collisions. Compare the magnitude of the force required to stop a moving passenger in 0.75 s (by a deployed air bag) with the magnitude of the force required to stop the same passenger at the same speed in 0.026 s (by the dashboard).

Answer:  $F_{air\,bag} = \frac{1}{29} \, F_{dashboard}$ 

#### PROBLEM GUIDE B

Use this guide to assign problems.

**SE** = Student Edition Textbook

**PW** = Sample Problem Set I (online)

**PB** = Sample Problem Set II (online)

#### Solving for:

| 0             |    |                                         |  |
|---------------|----|-----------------------------------------|--|
| F             | SE | Sample, 1–2;<br>Ch. Rvw. 12–13, 41, 47* |  |
|               | PW | 7–9                                     |  |
|               | РВ | 5–7                                     |  |
| $\Delta t$    | SE | 3*                                      |  |
|               | PW | Sample, 1–3                             |  |
|               | РВ | 8–10                                    |  |
| $\Delta p, v$ | SE | 4; Ch. Rvw. 46, 47*                     |  |
|               | PW | 4-6                                     |  |
|               | РВ | Sample, 1–4                             |  |

### \*Challenging Problem

#### **Answers**

#### **Practice B**

- 1.  $3.8 \times 10^2$  N to the left
- **2.**  $1.1 \times 10^{3} \text{ N upward}$
- 3. 16 kg•m/s to the south
- **4. a.** 9.0 m/s to the right
  - **b.** 15 m/s to the left

### **▼ Teach** continued

#### **TEACH FROM VISUALS**

FIGURE 1.3 Be sure students understand the relationship between stopping time and momentum.

Ask Why is the loaded truck's stopping time twice as much as the empty truck's when acted on by the same force?

**Answer**: The loaded truck's momentum must be twice as large as the unloaded truck, so its change in momentum is also twice as large. Assuming that the applied forces are the same, the time period must be twice as large because  $\Delta p = F\Delta t$ .

Ask How do the stopping distances of the trucks compare?

**Answer**: The loaded truck's time period is twice as large while its acceleration is half as much (F = ma). Because  $x = v_i \Delta t + \frac{1}{2} a \Delta t^2$ , the loaded truck's stopping distance is two times as large as the empty truck's. (The braking force is assumed to be the same in both cases.)

### Classroom Practice

#### STOPPING DISTANCE

If the maximum coefficient of kinetic friction between a 2300 kg car and a road is 0.50, what is the minimum stopping distance for a car entering a skid at 29 m/s?

Answer: 86 m

#### FIGURE 1.3

Stopping Distances The loaded truck must undergo a greater change in momentum in order to stop than the truck without a load.

#### Stopping times and distances depend on the impulse-momentum theorem.

Highway safety engineers use the impulse-momentum theorem to determine stopping distances and safe following distances for cars and trucks. For example, the truck hauling a load of bricks in Figure 1.3 has twice the mass of the other truck, which has no load. Therefore, if both are traveling at 48 km/h, the loaded truck has twice as much momentum as the unloaded truck. If we assume that the brakes on each truck exert about the same force, we find that the stopping time is two times longer for the loaded truck than for the unloaded truck, and the stopping distance for the loaded truck is two times greater than the stopping distance for the truck without a load.

#### **Stopping Distance**

**Interactive** Demo HMDScience.com

Sample Problem C A 2240 kg car traveling to the west slows down uniformly from 20.0 m/s to 5.00 m/s. How long does it take the car to decelerate if the force on the car is 8410 N to the east? How far does the car travel during the deceleration?

♠ ANALYZE

Given: 
$$m = 2240 \text{ kg}$$

 $\mathbf{v_i} = 20.0 \,\mathrm{m/s}$  to the west,  $v_i = -20 \,\mathrm{m/s}$ 

 $\mathbf{v_f} = 5.00 \text{ m/s}$  to the west,  $v_f = -5.00 \text{ m/s}$ 

F = 8410 N to the east, F = +8410 N

 $\Delta t = ?$ Unknown:

 $\Delta \mathbf{x} = ?$ 

Tips and Tricks

For motion in one dimension, take special care to set up the sign of the speed. You

can then treat the vectors in the equations of motion as

scalars and add direction at

Use the impulse-momentum theorem.

$$\mathbf{F} \Delta t = \Delta \mathbf{p}$$
$$\Delta t = \frac{\Delta \mathbf{p}}{\mathbf{F}} = \frac{m\mathbf{v_f} - m\mathbf{v_i}}{\mathbf{F}}$$

$$\Delta t = \frac{(2240 \text{ kg})(-5.00 \text{ m/s}) - (2240 \text{ kg})(-20.0 \text{ m/s})}{8410 \text{ kg} \cdot \text{m/s}^2}$$

 $\Delta t = 4.00 \text{ s}$ 

$$\Delta x = \frac{1}{2} (v_i + v_f) \Delta t$$

$$\Delta x = \frac{1}{2} (-20.0 \text{ m/s} - 5.00 \text{ m/s}) (4.00 \text{ s})$$

 $\Delta \mathbf{x} = -50.0 \text{ m} = 50.0 \text{ m}$  to the west

#### **Problem Solving**

Continued

#### TAKE IT FURTHER

Explain to students that if the velocities of an object before and after acceleration are known, we can find the mass of the object. Present the following scenario and have them find the mass of the object:

A cart is moving with a velocity of 4.62 m/s. In a period of 8.32 s, a force of 12.24 N is applied to the cart. As a result, the cart accelerates, and its velocity reaches 24.21 m/s. What is the mass of the cart? 5.20 kg

Explain that they simply need to substitute the given measures in the equation and solve it for m.

- 1. How long would the car in Sample Problem C take to come to a stop from its initial velocity of 20.0 m/s to the west? How far would the car move before stopping? Assume a constant acceleration.
- 2. A 2500 kg car traveling to the north is slowed down uniformly from an initial velocity of 20.0 m/s by a 6250 N braking force acting opposite the car's motion. Use the impulse-momentum theorem to answer the following questions:
  - a. What is the car's velocity after 2.50 s?
  - b. How far does the car move during 2.50 s?
  - c. How long does it take the car to come to a complete stop?
- 3. Assume that the car in Sample Problem C has a mass of 3250 kg.
  - a. How much force would be required to cause the same acceleration as in item 1? Use the impulse-momentum theorem.
  - b. How far would the car move before stopping? (Use the force found in **a**.)

#### Force is reduced when the time interval of an impact is increased.

The impulse-momentum theorem is used to design safety equipment that reduces the force exerted on the human body during collisions. Examples of this are the nets and giant air mattresses firefighters use to catch people who must jump out of tall burning buildings. The relationship is also used to design sports equipment and games.

Figure 1.4 shows an Inupiat family playing a traditional game. Common sense tells us that it is much better for the girl to fall onto the outstretched blanket than onto the hard ground. In both cases, however, the change in momentum of the falling girl is exactly the same. The difference is that the blanket "gives way" and extends the time of collision so that the change in the girl's momentum occurs over a longer time interval. A longer time interval requires a smaller force to achieve the same change in the girl's momentum. Therefore, the force exerted on the girl when she lands on the outstretched blanket is less than the force would be if she were to land on the ground.

#### FIGURE 1.4

Increasing the Time of Impact In this game, the girl is protected from injury because the blanket reduces the force of the collision by allowing it to take place over a longer time interval.


#### **PROBLEM guide c**

Use this guide to assign problems.

**SE** = Student Edition Textbook

**PW** = Sample Problem Set I (online)

**PB** = Sample Problem Set II (online)

#### **Solving for:**

| ∆x | SE | Sample, 1–3;<br>Ch. Rvw. 14 |
|----|----|-----------------------------|
|    | PW | 7–9                         |
|    | PB | 5–7                         |
| ∆t | SE | Sample, 1–2;<br>Ch. Rvw. 14 |
|    | PW | Sample, 1–3                 |
|    | PB | 8–10                        |
| ∆p | PW | 4–6                         |
|    | PB | Sample, 1–4                 |
| F  | SE | 3; Ch. Rvw. 41              |
|    | PW | Sample, 1–3                 |
|    | PB | 5–7                         |
|    |    |                             |

**\*Challenging Problem**

### **Answers**

#### **Practice C**

- **1.** 5.33 s; 53.3 m to the west
- **2. a.** 14 m/s to the north
  - **b.** 42 m to the north
  - **c.** 8.0 s
- **3. a.** 1.22 × 104 N to the east
  - **b.** 53.3 m to the west



> **[Teaching Tip]**
>
> Make sure students understand that the correspondence between the time interval and the force is a result of the impulse-momentum theorem. When the egg hits the plate, as in **Figure 1.5(a)**, the time period is shorter and the force is greater. When the egg hits the pillow, as in **(b)**, the time increases and the force decreases. As the time period increases, the force continues to decrease.
>

### **▼** Assess and Reteach

**Assess** Use the Formative Assessment on this page to evaluate student mastery of the section.

**Reteach** For students who need additional instruction, download the Section Study Guide.

**Response to Intervention** To reassess students' mastery, use the Section Quiz, available to print or to take directly online at **HMDScience.com**.

#### FIGURE 1.5

**Impact Time Changes Force** A large force exerted over a short time **(a)** causes the same change in the egg's momentum as a small force exerted over a longer time **(b)**.

Consider a falling egg. When the egg hits a hard surface, like the plate in Figure 1.5(a), the egg comes to rest in a very short time interval. The force the hard plate exerts on the egg due to the collision is large. When the egg hits a floor covered with a pillow, as in Figure 1.5(b), the egg undergoes the same change in momentum, but over a much longer time interval. In this case, the force required to accelerate the egg to rest is much smaller. By applying a small force to the egg over a longer time interval, the pillow causes the same change in the egg's momentum as the hard plate, which applies a large force over a short time interval. Because the force in the second situation is smaller, the egg can withstand it without breaking.


> **[Formative Assessment]**
>

#### Reviewing Main Ideas

- 1. The speed of a particle is doubled.
  - a. By what factor is its momentum changed?
  - **b.** What happens to its kinetic energy?
- **2.** A pitcher claims he can throw a 0.145 kg baseball with as much momentum as a speeding bullet. Assume that a 3.00 g bullet moves at a speed of  $1.50\times10^3$  m/s.
  - **a.** What must the baseball's speed be if the pitcher's claim is valid?
  - **b.** Which has greater kinetic energy, the ball or the bullet?
- ${\bf 3.}~{\rm A}~0.42~{\rm kg}$  soccer ball is moving downfield with a velocity of 12 m/s. A player kicks the ball so that it has a final velocity of 18 m/s downfield.
  - a. What is the change in the ball's momentum?
  - **b.** Find the constant force exerted by the player's foot on the ball if the two are in contact for 0.020 s.

#### **W** Critical Thinking

- **4.** When a force is exerted on an object, does a large force always produce a larger change in the object's momentum than a smaller force does? Explain.
- 5. What is the relationship between impulse and momentum?


> **[Answers to Section Assessment]**
>
> - **1. a.** momentum increases by a factor of two
> - **b.** kinetic energy increases by a factor of four
> - **2. a.** 31.0 m/s
> - **b.** the bullet
> - 3. a. 2.6 kg·m/s downfield
> - **b.**  $1.3 \times 10^2$  N downfield
>
> - **4.** no; Because  $\Delta \mathbf{p} = \mathbf{F} \Delta t$ , it is possible for a large force applied over a very short time interval to change the momentum less than a smaller force applied over a longer time period.
> - **5.** Impulse is equal to the change in momentum.
>

# Conservation of Momentum

#### Momentum Conservation

So far in this chapter, we have considered the momentum of only one object at a time. Now we will consider the momentum of two or more objects interacting with each other. Figure 2.1 shows a stationary billiard ball set into motion by a collision with a moving billiard ball. Assume that both balls are on a smooth table and that neither ball rotates before or after the collision. Before the collision, the momentum of ball B is equal to zero because the ball is stationary. During the collision, ball B gains momentum while ball A loses momentum. The momentum that ball A loses is exactly equal to the momentum that ball B gains.


#### Objectives

Describe the interaction between two objects in terms of the change in momentum of each object.

- Compare the total momentum of two objects before and after they interact.
- State the law of conservation of momentum.
- Predict the final velocities of objects after collisions, given the initial velocities.

#### FIGURE 2.1

Conservation of Momentum (a) Before the collision, the momentum of ball A is pA,i and of ball B is zero. (b) During the collision, ball A loses momentum, and ball B gains momentum. (c) After the collision, ball B has momentum pB,f.

Figure 2.2 shows the velocity and momentum of each billiard ball both before and after the collision. The momentum of each ball changes due to the collision, but the *total* momentum of both the balls remains constant.

#### FIGURE 2.2

| MOMENTUM IN A COLLISION |         |          |              |         |          |             |
|-------------------------|---------|----------|--------------|---------|----------|-------------|
|                         | Ball A  |          |              | Ball B  |          |             |
|                         | Mass    | Velocity | Momentum     | Mass    | Velocity | Momentum    |
| before collision        | 0.16 kg | 4.50 m/s | 0.72 kg•m/s  | 0.16 kg | 0 m/s    | 0 kg•m/s    |
| after collision         | 0.16 kg | 0.11 m/s | 0.018 kg•m/s | 0.16 kg | 4.39 m/s | 0.70 kg•m/s |




> **[Differentiated Instruction — Below Level]**
>
> Ask students to explain why the conservation of momentum is a vector quantity while the conservation of mass and the conservation of energy are scalar quantities. The calculation of momentum includes an object's velocity, which includes the direction of the object's motion, therefore momentum is a vector quantity. The calculation of kinetic energy considers only the object's speed, not its direction; therefore, it is a scalar quantity.
>

