---
chapter: 6
chapter_title: Momentum and Collisions
section: 2
section_title: SECTION 2
---

### **SECTION 2**



> **[Preview Vocabulary]**
>
> **Academic Vocabulary** The word *conservation* has the same meaning in both common-use and scientific contexts. Ask students how they practice conservation. Also ask for examples of conservation practices they have learned about through the media. Then ask what is meant by the conservation of momentum.
>

### **Teach**

#### **TEACH FROM VISUALS**

**FIGURE 2.1** Point out to students that the two billiard balls interact by physically colliding.

**Ask** How do the force exerted on ball A and the time interval over which it is exerted compare with the force exerted on ball B and its corresponding time interval?

**Answer**: The forces are equal in magnitude and opposite in direction (Newton's third law), and the time intervals are also equal.

**Ask** Using your answer to the previous question, compare the changes in momentum of the two balls.

**Answer**: The change in momentum of ball A must be equal in magnitude but opposite in direction to the change in momentum of ball B. This relationship is because of Newton's third law and the Impulse-momentum theorem,

∆**p** = **F**∆*t*.

### **Answers**

#### **Conceptual Challenge**

- **1.** No, the only possible way for their final total momentum to be zero is if the initial total momentum is also zero. This could happen only if both skaters initially have the same magnitude of momentum but in opposite directions.
- **2.** The principle of conservation of momentum tells us that the momentum of the spacecraft and its fuel before the rockets are fired must equal the momentum of the two after the rockets are fired. Both begin at rest, so the total initial momentum is zero. When the rockets are fired, the combustion of the fuel gives the exhaust gases momentum. The spacecraft will gain momentum equal in magnitude but opposite in direction to the exhaust gases. Thus, the total momentum will be kept at zero.

### **Key Models and Analogies**

Compare the principle of conservation of momentum with conservation of energy. Energy can be transferred from one object to another, but the *total* amount of energy in an isolated system remains constant. In a similar way, momentum is transferred during a collision, but the *total* momentum in an isolated system remains constant.

In other words, the momentum of ball A plus the momentum of ball B before the collision is equal to the momentum of ball A plus the momentum of ball B after the collision.

$$\mathbf{p}_{\mathrm{A,i}} + \mathbf{p}_{\mathrm{B,i}} = \mathbf{p}_{\mathrm{A,f}} + \mathbf{p}_{\mathrm{B,f}}$$

This relationship is true for all interactions between isolated objects and is known as the *law of conservation of momentum*.

#### Conservation of Momentum

$$m_1 \mathbf{v_{1,i}} + m_2 \mathbf{v_{2,i}} = m_1 \mathbf{v_{1,f}} + m_2 \mathbf{v_{2,f}}$$

**total initial momentum** = **total final momentum**

For an isolated system, the law of conservation of momentum can be stated as follows:

*The total momentum of all objects interacting with one another remains constant regardless of the nature of the forces between the objects.*

#### Momentum is conserved in collisions.

In the billiard ball example, we found that the momentum of ball A does not remain constant and the momentum of ball B does not remain constant, but the total momentum of ball A and ball B does remain constant. In general, the total momentum remains constant for a system of objects that interact with one another. In this case, in which the table is assumed to be frictionless, the billiard balls are the only two objects interacting. If a third object exerted a force on either ball A or ball B during the collision, the total momentum of ball A, ball B, and the third object would remain constant.

In this book, most conservation-of-momentum problems deal with only two isolated objects. However, when you use conservation of momentum to solve a problem or investigate a situation, it is important to include all objects that are involved in the interaction. Frictional forces—such as the frictional force between the billiard balls and the table—will be disregarded in most conservation-of-momentum problems in this book.

#### Momentum is conserved for objects pushing away from each other.

Another example of conservation of momentum occurs when two or more interacting objects that initially have no momentum begin moving away from each other. Imagine that you initially stand at rest and then jump up, leaving the ground with a velocity **v**. Obviously, *your* momentum is not conserved; before the jump, it was zero, and it became *m***v** as you began to rise. However, the total momentum remains constant if you include Earth in your analysis. The total momentum for you and Earth remains constant.

#### **Conceptual Challenge**

#### Ice Skating

If a reckless ice skater collides with another skater who is standing on the ice, is it possible for both skaters to be at rest after the collision?

#### Space Travel

A spacecraft undergoes a change of velocity when its rockets are fired. How does the space craft change velocity in empty space, where there is nothing for the gases emitted by the rockets to push against?



> **[Differentiated Instruction — Below Level]**
>
> Explain to the students that the cumulative effects of frictional forces during the collision are very small if we consider the system immediately before and immediately after the collision. With this assumption, we can consider momentum to be conserved. If longer periods of time are considered, frictional forces do become significant.
>
> If your momentum after you jump is 60 kg•m/s upward, then Earth must have a corresponding momentum of 60 kg•m/s downward, because total momentum is conserved. However, because Earth has an enormous mass (6  $\times$  10<sup>24</sup> kg), its momentum corresponds to a tiny velocity  $(1 \times 10^{-23} \,\mathrm{m/s}).$
>
> Imagine two skaters pushing away from each other, as shown in Figure 2.3. The skaters are both initially at rest with a momentum of  $\mathbf{p_{1.i}} = \mathbf{p_{2.i}} = 0$ . When they push away from each other, they move in opposite directions with equal but opposite momentum so that the total final momentum is also zero  $(\mathbf{p_{1,f}} + \mathbf{p_{2,f}} = 0)$ .
>

#### FIGURE 2.3

Momentum of Objects Pushing Away from Each Other (a) When the skaters stand facing each other, both skaters have zero momentum, so the total momentum of both skaters is zero. (b) When the skaters push away from each other, their momentum is equal but opposite, so the total momentum is still zero.

#### WHY IT MATTERS S.T.E.M.

# **Surviving a Collision**

ucks and carts collide in physics labs all the time with little damage. But when cars collide on a freeway, the resulting rapid change in speed can cause injury or death to the drivers and any passengers.

Many types of collisions are dangerous, but head-on collisions involve the greatest accelerations and thus the greatest forces. When two cars going 100 km/h (62 mi/h) collide head-on, each car dissipates the same amount of kinetic energy that it would dissipate if it hit the ground after being dropped from the roof of a 12-story building.

The key to many automobile-safety features is the concept of impulse. One way today's cars make use of the concept of impulse is by crumpling during impact. Pliable sheet metal and frame structures absorb energy until the force reaches the passenger compartment, which is built of rigid metal for protection. Because the crumpling slows the car gradually, it is an important factor in keeping the driver alive.

Even taking into account this built-in safety feature, the National Safety Council estimates that high-speed collisions involve accelerations of 20 times the free-fall acceleration. In other words, an 89 N (20 lb) infant could experience a force of 1780 N (400 lb) in a high-speed collision.

Seat belts are necessary to protect a body from forces of such large magnitudes. They stretch and extend the time it takes a passenger's body to stop, thereby reducing the force on the person. Air bags further extend the time over which the momentum of a passenger changes, decreasing the force even more. All new cars have air bags on both the driver and passenger sides. Many cars now have air bags in the door frames. Seat belts also prevent passengers from hitting the inside frame of the car. During a collision, a person not wearing a seat belt is likely to hit the windshield, the steering wheel, or the dashboard—often with traumatic results.

Momentum and Collisions

#### 199


> **[Differentiated Instruction — Pre-AP]**
>
> Give students values for the mass and speed of two cars, and have them calculate the changes in momentum with the assumption that the cars come to rest after the collision. Estimate a time interval for the collision, and have them calculate the forces experienced by the drivers.
>
> Have students research safety devices and designs that help protect drivers in a collision. Students can give oral reports that present their recommendation for a specific car or safety device.
>
> **[Misconception Alert]**
>
> Some students may think that the principle of conservation of momentum applies only to collisions. Use the example of two skaters in Figure 2.3 to show that the law holds even when the initial momentum is zero.
>

### **▼ Teach** continued

### Classroom Practice

#### **CONSERVATION OF MOMENTUM**

A 0.40 kg ball approaches a wall perpendicularly at 15 m/s. It collides with the wall and rebounds with an equal speed in the opposite direction. Calculate the impulse exerted on the wall.

**Answer**: 12 kg•m/s in the original direction of motion of the ball

#### **Conservation of Momentum**

Sample Problem D A 76 kg boater, initially at rest in a stationary 45 kg boat, steps out of the boat and onto the dock. If the boater moves out of the boat with a velocity of 2.5 m/s to the right, what is the final velocity of the boat?

**ANALYZE** 

**Given:** 
$$m_1 = 76 \text{ kg}$$
  $m_2 = 45 \text{ kg}$ 

$$\mathbf{v_{1,i}} = 0 \qquad \qquad \mathbf{v_{2,i}} = 0$$

$$\mathbf{v_{l.f}} = 2.5 \,\mathrm{m/s}$$
 to the right

Unknown: 
$$\mathbf{v_{2,f}} = ?$$

Diagram: 
$$m_1 =$$

$$m_I = 76 \text{ kg}$$

Choose an equation or situation: Because the total momentum of an isolated system remains constant, the total initial momentum of the boater and the boat will be equal to the total final momentum of the boater and the boat.

$$m_1 \mathbf{v_{l,i}} + m_2 \mathbf{v_{2,i}} = m_1 \mathbf{v_{l,f}} + m_2 \mathbf{v_{2,f}}$$

Because the boater and the boat are initially at rest, the total initial momentum of the system is equal to zero. Therefore, the final momentum of the system must also be equal to zero.

$$m_1 \mathbf{v_{1,f}} + m_2 \mathbf{v_{2,f}} = 0$$

Rearrange the equation to solve for the final velocity of the boat.

$$\begin{split} m_2 \mathbf{v_{2,f}} &= -m_1 \mathbf{v_{1,f}} \\ \mathbf{v_{2,f}} &= -\frac{m_1}{m_2} \mathbf{v_{1,f}} \end{split}$$

SOLVE

Substitute the values into the equations and solve:

$$v_{2,f} = -\frac{76 \text{ kg}}{45 \text{ kg}} (2.5 \text{ m/s to the right})$$

$$\mathbf{v_{2,f}} = -4.2 \text{ m/s}$$
 to the right

The negative sign for  $\boldsymbol{v_{2,f}}$  indicates that the boat is moving to the left, in the direction opposite the motion of the boater. Therefore,

$$\mathbf{v_{2 f}} = 4.2 \text{ m/s}$$
 to the left

**CHECK YOUR WORK** 

It makes sense that the boat should move away from the dock, so the answer seems reasonable

Continued

### **Problem Solving**

#### TAKE IT FURTHER

Explain that using the formula for conservation of momentum, one can find the initial velocity if the final velocity is given. Present the following scenario to the class:

A projectile with a mass of 120 grams is launched from a miniature cannon with a mass of 1240 grams. If the recoil velocity of the cannon is -24.32 m/s, determine the final velocity of the projectile. 251.31 m/s

Tell students that they simply need to replace the values in the formula and solve it for the final velocity. Ask students what would happen if the recoil velocity were not negative.

Momentum would not be conserved.

#### Conservation of Momentum (continued)

#### **Practice**

- 1. A 63.0 kg astronaut is on a spacewalk when the tether line to the shuttle breaks. The astronaut is able to throw a spare 10.0 kg oxygen tank in a direction away from the shuttle with a speed of 12.0 m/s, propelling the astronaut back to the shuttle. Assuming that the astronaut starts from rest with respect to the shuttle, find the astronaut's final speed with respect to the shuttle after the tank is thrown.
- 2. An 85.0 kg fisherman jumps from a dock into a 135.0 kg rowboat at rest on the west side of the dock. If the velocity of the fisherman is 4.30 m/s to the west as he leaves the dock, what is the final velocity of the fisherman and the boat?
- 3. Each croquet ball in a set has a mass of 0.50 kg. The green ball, traveling at 12.0 m/s, strikes the blue ball, which is at rest. Assuming that the balls slide on a frictionless surface and all collisions are head-on, find the final speed of the blue ball in each of the following situations:
  - a. The green ball stops moving after it strikes the blue ball.
  - ${\bf b.}\;$  The green ball continues moving after the collision at 2.4 m/s in the same direction.
- **4.** A boy on a 2.0 kg skateboard initially at rest tosses an 8.0 kg jug of water in the forward direction. If the jug has a speed of 3.0 m/s relative to the ground and the boy and skateboard move in the opposite direction at 0.60 m/s, find the boy's mass.

#### Newton's third law leads to conservation of momentum.

Consider two isolated bumper cars,  $m_I$  and  $m_2$ , before and after they collide. Before the collision, the velocities of the two bumper cars are  $\mathbf{v_{1,i}}$  and  $\mathbf{v_{2,i'}}$  respectively. After the collision, their velocities are  $\mathbf{v_{1,f}}$  and  $\mathbf{v_{2,f'}}$  respectively. The impulse-momentum theorem,  $\mathbf{F}\Delta t = \Delta \mathbf{p}$ , describes the change in momentum of one of the bumper cars. Applied to  $m_I$ , the impulse-momentum theorem gives the following:

$$\mathbf{F_1} \Delta t = m_I \mathbf{v_{1,f}} - m_I \mathbf{v_{1,i}}$$

Likewise, for  $m_2$  it gives the following:

$$\mathbf{F_2}\Delta t = m_2 \mathbf{v_{2.f}} - m_2 \mathbf{v_{2.i}}$$

 ${\bf F_1}$  is the force that  $m_2$  exerts on  $m_1$  during the collision, and  ${\bf F_2}$  is the force that  $m_1$  exerts on  $m_2$  during the collision. Because the only forces acting in the collision are the forces the two bumper cars exert on each other, Newton's third law tells us that the force on  $m_1$  is equal to and opposite the force on  $m_2$  ( ${\bf F_1}=-{\bf F_2}$ ). Additionally, the two forces act over the same time interval,  $\Delta t$ . Therefore, the force  $m_2$  exerts on  $m_1$  multiplied by the time interval is equal to the force  $m_1$  exerts on  $m_2$  multiplied by the time interval, or  ${\bf F_1}\Delta t=-{\bf F_2}\Delta t$ . That is, the impulse on  $m_1$  is equal to and opposite the impulse on  $m_2$ . This relationship is true in every collision or interaction between two isolated objects.


Momentum and Collisions

#### 201


> **[Differentiated Instruction — Below Level]**
>
> A quick review of Newton's third law may help students better follow the derivation of the conservation of momentum in this section. Remind students that, according to Newton's third law, the force exerted by one body on another is equal in magnitude and opposite in direction to the force exerted on the first body by the second body.
>
> **PROBLEM GUIDE D**
>
> Use this guide to assign problems.
>
> **SE** = Student Edition Textbook
>
> **PW** = Sample Problem Set I (online)
>
> **PB** = Sample Problem Set II (online)
>

#### **Solving for:**

| $v_f$   | SE | Sample, 1–3; Ch.<br>Rvw. 22–23, 40*, 43*,<br>44*, 48*, 50* |  |
|---------|----|------------------------------------------------------------|--|
|         | PW | 5–7                                                        |  |
|         | РВ | 5–7                                                        |  |
| $v_{i}$ | PW | 3–4                                                        |  |
|         | РВ | Sample, 1–4                                                |  |
| m       | SE | 4                                                          |  |
|         | PW | Sample, 1–2                                                |  |
|         | РВ | 8–10                                                       |  |

\*Challenging Problem

#### **Answers**

#### **Practice D**

- 1. 1.90 m/s
- **2.** 1.66 m/s to the west
- **3. a.** 12.0 m/s
  - **b.** 9.6 m/s
- **4.** 38 kg



> **[Teaching Tip]**
>
> Remind students that conservation laws are valid only for a closed system. In the example of two bumper cars colliding, the system consists of the two cars. Most cases considered in this chapter involve just two objects in a collision, but a system can include any number of objects interacting with one another. All examples discussed in this chapter assume an isolated system unless stated otherwise.
>
> Force and Change in Momentum During the collision, the force exerted on each bumper car causes a change in momentum for each car. The total momentum is the same before and after the collision.
>
> Figure 2.4 illustrates the forces acting on each bumper car. Because impulse is equal to the change in momentum, and the impulse on  $m_1$  is equal to and opposite the impulse on  $m_2$ , the change in momentum of  $m_1$ is equal to and opposite the change in momentum of  $m_2$ . This means that in every interaction between two isolated objects, the change in momentum of the first object is equal to and opposite the change in momentum of the second object. In equation form, this is expressed by the following equation.
>
> $$m_1 \mathbf{v_{1,f}} - m_1 \mathbf{v_{1,i}} = -(m_2 \mathbf{v_{2,f}} - m_2 \mathbf{v_{2,i}})$$
>
> This equation means that if the momentum of one object increases after a collision, then the momentum of the other object in the situation must decrease by an equal amount. Rearranging this equation gives the following equation for the conservation of momentum.
>
> $$m_1 \mathbf{v_{1,i}} + m_2 \mathbf{v_{2,i}} = m_1 \mathbf{v_{1,f}} + m_2 \mathbf{v_{2,f}}$$
>

#### Forces in real collisions are not constant during the collisions.

In this book, the forces involved in a collision are treated as though they are constant. In a real collision, however, the forces may vary in time in a complicated way. Figure 2.5 shows the forces acting during the collision of the two bumper cars. At all times during the collision, the forces on the two cars at any instant during the collision are equal in magnitude and opposite in direction. However, the magnitudes of the forces change throughout the collision—increasing, reaching a maximum, and then

When solving impulse problems, you should use the average force over the time of the collision as the value for force. Recall that the average velocity of an object undergoing a constant acceleration is equal to the constant velocity required for the object to travel the same displacement in the same time interval. The time-averaged force during a collision is equal to the constant force required to cause the same change in momentum as the real, changing force.

Force on Two Bumper Cars This graph shows the force on each bumper car during the collision. Although both forces vary with time, F, and F, are always equal in magnitude and opposite in direction.

### **Problem Solving**

#### **REALITY CHECK**

Presenting real-life scenarios helps students to sharpen their understanding and critical thinking skills. Ask students to think about a man who, while running, jumps onto a treadmill. What happens to his velocity upon reaching the treadmill? Does it increase or decrease? It increases. What happens to his momentum after reaching the treadmill? It also increases. Now ask students to imagine a running man entering a moving sidewalk

(conveyor belt) from the wrong direction. What happens to his velocity and momentum in this situation? Both decrease.

#### **SECTION 2 FORMATIVE ASSESSMENT**

#### Reviewing Main Ideas

- 1. A 44 kg student on in-line skates is playing with a 22 kg exercise ball. Disregarding friction, explain what happens during the following situations.
  - a. The student is holding the ball, and both are at rest. The student then throws the ball horizontally, causing the student to glide back at 3.5 m/s.
  - **b.** Explain what happens to the ball in part (a) in terms of the momentum of the student and the momentum of the ball.
  - c. The student is initially at rest. The student then catches the ball, which is initially moving to the right at 4.6 m/s.
  - d. Explain what happens in part (c) in terms of the momentum of the student and the momentum of the ball.
- 2. A boy stands at one end of a floating raft that is stationary relative to the shore. He then walks in a straight line to the opposite end of the raft, away
  - a. Does the raft move? Explain.
  - **b.** What is the total momentum of the boy and the raft before the boy walks across the raft?
  - c. What is the total momentum of the boy and the raft after the boy walks
- 3. High-speed stroboscopic photographs show the head of a 215 g golf club traveling at 55.0 m/s just before it strikes a 46 g golf ball at rest on a tee. After the collision, the club travels (in the same direction) at 42.0 m/s. Use the law of conservation of momentum to find the speed of the golf ball just after impact.

#### Critical Thinking

- 4. Two isolated objects have a head-on collision. For each of the following questions, explain your answer.
  - a. If you know the change in momentum of one object, can you find the change in momentum of the other object?
  - b. If you know the initial and final velocity of one object and the mass of the other object, do you have enough information to find the final velocity of the second object?
  - c. If you know the masses of both objects and the final velocities of both objects, do you have enough information to find the initial velocities of both objects?
  - d. If you know the masses and initial velocities of both objects and the final velocity of one object, do you have enough information to find the final velocity of the other object?
  - e. If you know the change in momentum of one object and the initial and final velocities of the other object, do you have enough information to find the mass of either object?


**Assess** Use the Formative Assessment on this page to evaluate student mastery of the section.

Reteach For students who need additional instruction, download the Section Study Guide.

**Response to Intervention** To reassess students' mastery, use the Section Quiz, available to print or to take directly online at HMDScience.com.


> **[Answers to Section Assessment]**
>
> Momentum and Collisions
>
> 203
>
> - 1. a. The ball will move away at 7.0 m/s.
> - **b.** The momentum gained by the ball must be equal to and opposite the momentum gained by the student.
> - c. The student and the ball will move to the right at 1.5 m/s.
> - d. The student's initial momentum is zero. When the student catches the ball, some of the ball's momentum is transferred to the student.
> - 2. a. yes; The total initial momentum is zero, so the boy and the raft must move in opposite directions to conserve momentum.
> - b. zero
> - c. zero
> - 3. 61 m/s
> - 4. a. Yes, the momentum lost by one object must equal the momentum gained by the other object.
> - **b.** No,  $\mathbf{v}_{2i}$  also depends on  $\mathbf{v}_{2i}$  and  $m_i$ .
>
> - c. No, using the conservation of momentum, you could only find a relationship between **v**<sub>1</sub>, and **v**<sub>2</sub>.
> - d. Yes, using the conservation of momentum, you could substitute the given values and solve for  $\mathbf{v}_{\epsilon}$ .
> - e. Using the conservation of momentum, you could find  $m_i$  if  $\mathbf{v_{i}}$  and  $\mathbf{v_{if}}$  are given, but you would need  $\mathbf{v}_{1}$  and  $\mathbf{v}_{2}$ to find  $m_2$ .
>
>

### **▼ Plan and Prepare**


> **[Preview Vocabulary]**
>
> Scientific Meaning Elasticity of materials is defined by their flexibility in length, shape, and volume. Have students provide examples of elastic materials. Ask students to give examples of changes in length, shape, and volume.
>

### **▼** Teach


> **[Demonstration]**
>

#### **INELASTIC COLLISIONS**

**Purpose** Show the conservation of momentum in an inelastic collision.

Materials two balls with the same mass. two pieces of string, tape, small piece of modeling clay, meterstick, chalkboard

**Procedure** Tie or tape a string around each ball. Hold the two strings so that the balls hang at the same height in front of each other on the chalkboard. Place the clay on one of the balls. Hold up one of the balls and have a student mark its displacement on the chalkboard.

Release the ball. It should stick to the second ball; both balls should move together. Have a student mark the displacement of the two balls after the collision. Measure the displacements with the meterstick. If momentum is conserved, the height of the two balls together will be  $\frac{1}{4}$  the original height. Explain to the students that according to the conservation of momentum,  $m_{_{1}}\mathbf{v}_{_{1,\mathbf{i}}}+m_{_{2}}\mathbf{v}_{_{2,\mathbf{i}}}=(m_{_{1}}+m_{_{2}})\mathbf{v}_{_{\mathbf{f}}}\,\mathrm{for}\,\mathrm{a}$ perfectly inelastic collision. Since the second ball starts at rest, the final velocity of the two balls will be half the initial velocity of the first ball. Because the kinetic energy at the bottom of the swing equals the potential energy at the top ( $mgh = \frac{1}{2} mv^2$ ), the two balls should reach  $\frac{1}{4}$  the initial height of the first ball.


Identify different types of collisions.

Determine the changes in kinetic energy during perfectly inelastic collisions.

Compare conservation of momentum and conservation of kinetic energy in perfectly inelastic and elastic collisions.

Find the final velocity of an object in perfectly inelastic and elastic collisions.

#### perfectly inelastic collision a collision in which two objects stick together after colliding

#### FIGURE 3.1

#### **Perfectly Inelastic Collision**

When one football player tackles another, they both continue to fall together. This is one familiar example of a perfectly inelastic collision

# **Elastic and Inelastic** Collisions

**Key Terms** 

perfectly inelastic collision

elastic collision

#### Collisions

As you go about your day-to-day activities, you probably witness many collisions without really thinking about them. In some collisions, two objects collide and stick together so that they travel together after the impact. An example of this action is a collision between football players during a tackle, as shown in Figure 3.1. In an isolated system, the two football players would both move together after the collision with a momentum equal to the sum of their *momenta* (plural of *momentum*) before the collision. In other collisions, such as a collision between a tennis racket and a tennis ball, two objects collide and bounce so that they move away with two different velocities.

The total momentum remains constant in any type of collision. However, the total kinetic energy is generally not conserved in a collision because some kinetic energy is converted to internal energy when the objects deform. In this section, we will examine different types of collisions and determine whether kinetic energy is conserved in each type. We will primarily explore two extreme types of collisions: perfectly inelastic collisions and elastic collisions.

#### Perfectly inelastic collisions can be analyzed in terms of momentum.

When two objects, such as the two football players, collide and move together as one mass, the collision is called a perfectly inelastic collision. Likewise, if a meteorite collides head on with Earth, it becomes buried in Earth and the collision is perfectly inelastic.



> **[Differentiated Instruction — English Learners]**
>
> Students may be familiar with the word elastic as referring to something that always returns to its original shape. A rubber band is a familiar example.
>
> In physics, the word *elastic* is related to work. Work is done to change the shape of the material during a collision. The work done to change the material's shape equals the work that the material does to return to its original
>
> shape. The term *elastic* involves returning to an original shape in both cases, but the use of the term in physics is more specific.
>
> Perfectly inelastic collisions are easy to analyze in terms of momentum because the objects become essentially one object after the collision. The final mass is equal to the combined masses of the colliding objects. The combination moves with a predictable velocity after the collision.
>
> Consider two cars of masses  $m_1$  and  $m_2$  moving with initial velocities of  $v_{1,i}$  and  $v_{2,i}$  along a straight line, as shown in Figure 3.2. The two cars stick together and move with some common velocity,  $\mathbf{v_f}$ , along the same line of motion after the collision. The total momentum of the two cars before the collision is equal to the total momentum of the two cars after
>

#### **Perfectly Inelastic Collision**

$$m_1 \mathbf{v_{1,i}} + m_2 \mathbf{v_{2,i}} = (m_1 + m_2) \mathbf{v_f}$$

This simplified version of the equation for conservation of momentum is useful in analyzing perfectly inelastic collisions. When using this equation, it is important to pay attention to signs that indicate direction. In Figure 3.2,  $\mathbf{v_{l,i}}$  has a positive value ( $m_1$  moving to the right), while  $\mathbf{v_{2,i}}$  has a negative value ( $m_2$  moving to the left).

**Interactive** Demo

HMDScience.com

#### Perfectly Inelastic Collisions

Sample Problem E A 1850 kg luxury sedan stopped at a traffic light is struck from the rear by a compact car with a mass of 975 kg. The two cars become entangled as a result of the collision. If the compact car was moving at a velocity of 22.0 m/s to the north before the collision, what is the velocity of the entangled mass after the collision?

**ANALYZE** 

 $m_1 = 1850 \text{ kg}$ Given:

 $m_2 = 975 \text{ kg}$ 

 $\mathbf{v_{1,i}} = 0 \, \mathrm{m/s}$ 

 $\mathbf{v_{2,i}} = 22.0 \text{ m/s}$  to the north

Unknown:

2 SOLVE

Use the equation for a perfectly inelastic collision.

$$m_{I}\mathbf{v_{1,i}} + m_{2}\mathbf{v_{2,i}} = (m_{I} + m_{2})\mathbf{v_{f}}$$

$$\mathbf{v_f} = \frac{m_1 \mathbf{v_{1,i}} + m_2 \mathbf{v_{2,i}}}{m_1 + m_2}$$

 $\mathbf{v_f} = \frac{(1850 \text{ kg})(0 \text{ m/s}) + (975 \text{ kg})(22.0 \text{ m/s north})}{(1850 \text{ kg})(195 \text{ kg})(195 \text{ kg})(195 \text{ kg})}$ 

 $\mathbf{v_f} = 7.59 \,\mathrm{m/s}$  to the north

### **Problem Solving**

Momentum and Collisions

205

#### TAKE IT FURTHER

To show students how to calculate a partially inelastic collision, present a system in which a piece of metal with a mass of 7 kg is moving to the right at a speed of 4 m/s. The metallic mass hits a wooden box with a mass of 3 kg. The wooden box is initially in motion with a velocity of 6 m/s to the left. Have students calculate the original kinetic energy that is dissipated. 10 m/s

#### **Classroom Practice**

#### PERFECTLY INELASTIC COLLISIONS

An empty train car moving east at 21 m/s collides with a loaded train car initially at rest that has twice the mass of the empty car. The two cars stick together.

- a. Find the velocity of the two cars after the collision.
- **b.** Find the final speed if the loaded car moving at 17 m/s had hit the empty car initially at rest.

#### **Answers**

- a. 7.0 m/s to the east
- **b.** 11 m/s

An empty train car moving at 15 m/s collides with a loaded car of three times the mass moving in the same direction at one-third the speed of the empty car. The cars stick together. Find the speed of the cars after the collision.

Answer: 7.5 m/s


#### **PROBLEM guide E**

Use this guide to assign problems.

**SE** = Student Edition Textbook

**PW** = Sample Problem Set I (online)

**PB** = Sample Problem Set II (online)

**Solving for:**

| vf | SE | Sample, 1–3;<br>Ch. Rvw. 28–32, |  |
|----|----|---------------------------------|--|
|    | PW | 7–9                             |  |
|    | PB | 5–7                             |  |
| vi | SE | 4, 5*; Ch. Rvw. 39, 42          |  |
|    | PW | 4–6                             |  |
|    | PB | Sample, 1–4                     |  |
| m  | SE | 5*; Ch. Rvw. 38*                |  |
|    | PW | Sample, 1–3                     |  |
|    | PB | 8–10                            |  |
|    |    |                                 |  |

### **Answers**

#### **Practice E**

**1.** 3.8 m/s to the south

**\*Challenging Problem**

- **2.** 1.8 m/s
- **3.** 4.25 m/s to the north
- **4.** 4.2 m/s to the right
- **5. a.** 3.0 kg
  - **b.** 5.32 m/s


> **[Misconception Alert]**
>
> Students may think that elastic materials can undergo only elastic collisions. Consider a large brass bell with a clapper. The material, brass, is very elastic. After the collision, the bell continues to vibrate and give off sound (energy!) for a long time afterwards. The collision *isn't* elastic even though the materials are. Inelastic materials undergo *only* inelastic collisions. Elastic materials may undergo either elastic or inelastic collisions.
>

#### Perfectly Inelastic Collisions (continued)

- 1. A 1500 kg car traveling at 15.0 m/s to the south collides with a 4500 kg truck that is initially at rest at a stoplight. The car and truck stick together and move together after the collision. What is the final velocity of the two-vehicle mass?
- 2. A grocery shopper tosses a 9.0 kg bag of rice into a stationary 18.0 kg grocery cart. The bag hits the cart with a horizontal speed of 5.5 m/s toward the front of the cart. What is the final speed of the cart and bag?
- 3. A 1.50 × 104 kg railroad car moving at 7.00 m/s to the north collides with and sticks to another railroad car of the same mass that is moving in the same direction at 1.50 m/s. What is the velocity of the joined cars after the collision?
- 4. A dry cleaner throws a 22 kg bag of laundry onto a stationary 9.0 kg cart. The cart and laundry bag begin moving at 3.0 m/s to the right. Find the velocity of the laundry bag before the collision.
- 5. A 47.4 kg student runs down the sidewalk and jumps with a horizontal speed of 4.20 m/s onto a stationary skateboard. The student and skateboard move down the sidewalk with a speed of 3.95 m/s. Find the following:
  - a. the mass of the skateboard
  - b. how fast the student would have to jump to have a final speed of 5.00 m/s

#### Kinetic energy is not conserved in inelastic collisions.

In an inelastic collision, the total kinetic energy does not remain constant when the objects collide and stick together. Some of the kinetic energy is converted to sound energy and internal en ergy as the objects deform during the collision.

This phenomenon helps make sense of the special use of the words *elastic* and *inelastic* in physics. We normally think of *elastic* as referring to something that always returns to, or keeps, its original shape. In physics, an elastic material is one in which the work done to deform the material during a collision is equal to the work the material does to return to its original shape. During a collision, some of the work done on an *inelastic* material is converted to other forms of energy, such as heat and sound.

The decrease in the total kinetic energy during an inelastic collision can be calculated by using the formula for kinetic energy, as shown in Sample Problem F. It is important to remember that not all of the initial kinetic energy is necessarily lost in a perfectly inelastic collision.



> **[Differentiated Instruction — Inclusion]**
>
> Visual and kinesthetic learners will benefit from demonstrations of inelastic collisions that use toy trains or other objects. When one train car collides with another, they become coupled together and move as a unit. Plan several demonstrations of different types of collisions as you teach this section.
>

#### Kinetic Energy in Perfectly Inelastic Collisions

**Interactive** Demo HMDScience.com

Sample Problem F Two clay balls collide head-on in a perfectly inelastic collision. The first ball has a mass of 0.500 kg and an initial velocity of 4.00 m/s to the right. The second ball has a mass of 0.250 kg and an initial velocity of 3.00 m/s to the left. What is the decrease in kinetic energy during the collision?

**ANALYZE** 

Given: 
$$m_1 = 0.500 \,\mathrm{kg}$$
  $m_2 = 0.250 \,\mathrm{kg}$ 

$${\bf v_{l,i}} = 4.00 \, {\rm m/s}$$
 to the right,  $v_{l,i} = +4.00 \, {\rm m/s}$ 

$$\mathbf{v_{2,i}} = 3.00 \text{ m/s}$$
 to the left,  $v_{2,i} = -3.00 \text{ m/s}$ 

Unknown:  $\Delta KE = ?$ 

#### Choose an equation or situation:

The change in kinetic energy is simply the initial kinetic energy subtracted from the final kinetic energy.

$$\Delta KE = KE_f - KE_i$$

Determine both the initial and final kinetic energy.

Initial: 
$$KE_i = KE_{1,i} + KE_{2,i} = \frac{1}{2} m_1 v_{1,i}^2 + \frac{1}{2} m_2 v_{2,i}^2$$

Final: 
$$KE_f = KE_{1.f} + KE_{2.f} = \frac{1}{2}(m_1 + m_2)v_f^2$$

As you did in Sample Problem E, use the equation for a perfectly inelastic collision to calculate the final velocity

$$\mathbf{v_f} = \frac{m_1 \mathbf{v_{1,i}} + m_2 \mathbf{v_{2,i}}}{m_1 + m_2}$$

3 SOLVE

#### Substitute the values into the equation and solve:

First, calculate the final velocity, which will be used in the final kinetic energy equation

$$v_f = \frac{(0.500 \text{ kg})(4.00 \text{ m/s}) + (0.250 \text{ kg})(-3.00 \text{ m/s})}{0.500 \text{ kg} + 0.250 \text{ kg}}$$

 $\mathbf{v_f} = 1.67 \,\mathrm{m/s}$  to the right

Next calculate the initial and final kinetic energy.

$$KE_i = \frac{1}{2}(0.500 \text{ kg})(4.00 \text{ m/s})^2 + \frac{1}{2}(0.250 \text{ kg})(-3.00 \text{ m/s})^2 = 5.12 \text{ J}$$

$$KE_f = \frac{1}{2}(0.500 \text{ kg} + 0.250 \text{ kg})(1.67 \text{ m/s})^2 = 1.05 \text{ J}$$

Finally, calculate the change in kinetic energy.

$$\Delta KE = KE_f - KE_i = 1.05 \text{ J} - 5.12 \text{ J}$$

$$\Delta KE = -4.07 \text{ J}$$

**CHECK YOUR WORK**  The negative sign indicates that kinetic energy is lost.

### **Problem Solving**

Momentum and Collisions

207

#### TAKE IT FURTHER

Tell students that they can combine the formulas for initial kinetic energy and final kinetic energy before replacing the values, and then substitute the known measures in the combined formula. The combination process is as follows:

$$KE_f = \frac{1}{2}(m_1 + m_2)v_f^2$$

$$KE_{i} = \frac{1}{2}m_{1}v_{1,i}^{2} + \frac{1}{2}m_{2}v_{2,i}^{2}$$

Subtract the equations side by side, and expand the right side.

$$KE_{f} - KE_{i} = \frac{1}{2}(m_{1} + m_{2})v_{f}^{2} - \left(\frac{1}{2}m_{1}v_{1,i}^{2} + \frac{1}{2}m_{2}v_{2,i}^{2}\right)$$

$$KE_{f} - KE_{i} = \frac{1}{2}m_{1}v_{f}^{2} + \frac{1}{2}m_{2}v_{f}^{2} - \frac{1}{2}m_{1}v_{1,i}^{2} - \frac{1}{2}m_{2}v_{2,i}^{2}$$

Next, factor out as below:

$$KE_f - KE_i = \frac{1}{2}m_1(v_f^2 - v_{1,i}^2) + \frac{1}{2}m_2(v_f^2 - v_{2,i}^2)$$

#### **Classroom Practice**

#### **KINETIC ENERGY IN PERFECTLY INELASTIC COLLISIONS**

A clay ball with a mass of 0.35 kg hits another 0.35 kg ball at rest, and the two stick together. The first ball has an initial speed of 4.2 m/s.

- a. What is the final speed of the balls?
- **b.** Calculate the decrease in kinetic energy that occurs during the collision.
- c. What percentage of the initial kinetic energy is converted to other forms of energy?

#### **Answers**

- **a.** 2.1 m/s
- **b.** 1.6 J
- c. 52 percent (This is actually 50 percent. The difference is due to rounding.)

A 0.75 kg ball moving at 3.8 m/s to the right strikes an identical ball moving at 3.8 m/s to the left. The balls stick together after the collision and stop. What percentage of the initial kinetic energy is converted to other forms?

Answer: 100 percent


#### **PROBLEM guide F**

Use this guide to assign problems.

**SE** = Student Edition Textbook

**PW** = Sample Problem Set I (online)

**PB** = Sample Problem Set II (online)

#### **Solving for:**

∆*KE* **SE** Sample, 1–3; Ch. Rvw. 30–31,

**PW** Sample, 1–7

**PB** Sample, 1–10

**\*Challenging Problem**

### **Answers**

#### **Practice F**

- **1. a.** 0.43 m/s to the west
  - **b.** 17 J
- **2. a.** 6.2 m/s to the south
  - **b.** 3.9 J
- **3. a.** 4.6 m/s to the south
  - **b.** 3.9 × 103 J

### **Key Models and Analogies**

Just as friction is often disregarded to simplify situations, the decrease in kinetic energy in a nearly elastic collision can be disregarded to create an ideal case. This ideal case can then be used to obtain a very close approximation to the observed result.

#### Kinetic Energy in Perfectly Inelastic Collisions (continued)

- 1. A 0.25 kg arrow with a velocity of 12 m/s to the west strikes and pierces the center of a 6.8 kg target.
  - a. What is the final velocity of the combined mass?
  - b. What is the decrease in kinetic energy during the collision?
- 2. During practice, a student kicks a 0.40 kg soccer ball with a velocity of 8.5 m/s to the south into a 0.15 kg bucket lying on its side. The bucket travels with the ball after the collision.
  - a. What is the final velocity of the combined mass of the bucket and the ball?
  - b. What is the decrease in kinetic energy during the collision?
- 3. A 56 kg ice skater traveling at 4.0 m/s to the north meets and joins hands with a 65 kg skater traveling at 12.0 m/s in the opposite direction. Without rotating, the two skaters continue skating together with joined hands.
  - a. What is the final velocity of the two skaters?
  - b. What is the decrease in kinetic energy during the collision?

elastic collision a collision in which the total momentum and the total kinetic energy are conserved

#### Elastic Collisions

When a player kicks a soccer ball, the collision between the ball and the player's foot is much closer to elastic than the collisions we have studied so far. In this case, *elastic* means that the ball and the player's foot remain separate after the collision.

In an elastic collision, two objects collide and return to their original shapes with no loss of total kinetic energy. After the collision, the two objects move separately. In an elastic collision, both the total momentum and the total kinetic energy are conserved.

#### Most collisions are neither elastic nor perfectly inelastic.

In the everyday world, most collisions are not perfectly inelastic. Colliding objects do not usually stick together and continue to move as one object. Most collisions are not elastic, either. Even *nearly* elastic collisions, such as those between billiard balls, result in some decrease in kinetic energy. For example, a football deforms when it is kicked. During this deformation, some of the kinetic energy is converted to internal elastic potential energy. In most collisions, some kinetic energy is also converted into sound, such as the click of billiard balls colliding. In fact, any collision that produces sound is not elastic; the sound signifies a decrease in kinetic energy.

Elastic and perfectly inelastic collisions are limiting cases; most collisions actually fall into a category between these two extremes. In this third category of collisions, called *inelastic collisions*, the colliding objects bounce and move separately after the collision, but the total kinetic energy decreases in the collision. *For the problems in this book, we will*



> **[Differentiated Instruction — Below Level]**
>
> Discuss a variety of examples of collisions with students. For each example, ask whether the collision is closer to an elastic collision or to a perfectly inelastic collision. Also ask students where kinetic energy is converted to other forms of energy in each of the different examples.
>
> *consider all collisions in which the objects do not stick together to be elastic collisions*. Therefore, we will assume that the total momentum and the total kinetic energy will each stay the same before and after a collision in all collisions that are not perfectly inelastic.
>

#### Kinetic energy is conserved in elastic collisions.

Figure 3.3 shows an elastic head-on collision between two soccer balls of equal mass. Assume, as in earlier examples, that the balls are isolated on a frictionless surface and that they do not rotate. The first ball is moving to the right when it collides with the second ball, which is moving to the left. When considered as a whole, the entire system has momentum to the left.

After the elastic collision, the first ball moves to the left and the second ball moves to the right. The magnitude of the momentum of the first ball, which is now moving to the left, is greater than the magnitude of the momentum of the second ball, which is now moving to the right. The entire system still has momentum to the left, just as before the collision.

Another example of a nearly elastic collision is the collision between a golf ball and a club. After a golf club strikes a stationary golf ball, the golf ball moves at a very high speed in the same direction as the golf club. The golf club continues to move in the same direction, but its velocity decreases so that the momentum lost by the golf club is equal to and opposite the momentum gained by the golf ball. *The total momentum is always constant throughout the collision. In addition, if the collision is perfectly elastic, the value of the total kinetic energy after the collision is equal to the value before the collision*.

#### Momentum and Kinetic Energy Are Conserved in an Elastic Collision

$$\begin{split} & m_{I}\mathbf{v_{1,i}} + m_{2}\mathbf{v_{2,i}} = m_{I}\mathbf{v_{1,f}} + m_{2}\mathbf{v_{2,f}} \\ & \frac{1}{2} \left. m_{I}v_{I,i} \right.^{2} + \frac{1}{2} \left. m_{2}v_{2,i} \right.^{2} = \frac{1}{2} \left. m_{I}v_{I,f} \right.^{2} + \frac{1}{2} \left. m_{2}v_{2,f} \right.^{2} \end{split}$$

Remember that *v* is positive if an object moves to the right and negative if it moves to the left.

#### FIGURE 3.3

Elastic Collision In an elastic collision like this one (b), both objects return to their original shapes and move separately after the collision (c).

### **Problem Solving**

#### **Deconstructing Problems**

Point out to students that they should recognize the first equation in the box. This equation, which expresses the principle of conservation of momentum, holds for both types of collisions. The conservation of kinetic energy, on the other hand—which is expressed by the second equation in the box—is valid only for elastic collisions.

#### MATERIALS

• 2 or 3 small balls of different types SAFETY

 Perform this lab in an open space, preferably outdoors, away from furniture and other people.

#### ELASTIC AND INELASTIC COLLISIONS

Drop one of the balls from shoulder height onto a hardsurfaced floor or sidewalk. Observe the motion of the ball before and after it collides with the ground. Next, throw the ball down from the same height. Perform several trials, giving the ball a different velocity each time. Repeat with the other balls.

During each trial, observe the height to which the ball bounces. Rate the collisions from most nearly elastic to most inelastic. Describe what evidence you have for or against conservation of kinetic energy and conservation of momentum for each collision. Based on your observations, do you think the equation for elastic collisions is useful to make predictions?


### **QuickLab**

#### **Teacher's Notes**

The purpose of this lab is to show that in any collision, the elasticity of the materials involved affects the changes in kinetic energy. Test the balls before the lab in order to ensure a noticeable difference in elasticity. An interesting contrast can be observed by comparing new tennis balls with older ones.

**Homework Options** This QuickLab can easily be performed outside of the physics lab room.

### **▼ Teach** continued

### Classroom Practice

#### **ELASTIC COLLISIONS**

Two billiard balls, each with a mass of 0.35 kg, strike each other head-on. One ball is initially moving left at 4.1 m/s and ends up moving right at 3.5 m/s. The second ball is initially moving to the right at 3.5 m/s. Assume that neither ball rotates before or after the collision and that both balls are moving on a frictionless surface. Predict the final velocity of the second ball.

#### **Answer**: 4.1 m/s to the left

Two nonrotating balls on a frictionless surface collide elastically head on. The first ball has a mass of 15 g and an initial velocity of 3.5 m/s to the right, while the second ball has a mass of 22 g and an initial velocity of 4.0 m/s to the left. The final velocity of the 15 g ball is 5.4 m/s to the left. What is the final velocity of the 22 g ball?

**Answer**: 2.0 m/s to the right

#### **Elastic Collisions**

Sample Problem G A 0.015 kg marble moving to the right at 0.225 m/s makes an elastic head-on collision with a 0.030 kg shooter marble moving to the left at 0.180 m/s. After the collision, the smaller marble moves to the left at 0.315 m/s. Assume that neither marble rotates before or after the collision and that both marbles are moving on a frictionless surface. What is the velocity of the 0.030 kg marble after the collision?

Given:

ANALYZE

$$m_1 = 0.015 \,\mathrm{kg}$$

$$m_2 = 0.030 \text{ kg}$$

$$v_{1,i} = 0.225 \text{ m/s}$$
 to the right,  $v_{1,i} = +0.225 \text{ m/s}$ 

$$\mathbf{v_{2,i}} = 0.180 \text{ m/s}$$
 to the left,  $v_{2,i} = -0.180 \text{ m/s}$ 

$$v_{1.f} = 0.315 \text{ m/s}$$
 to the left,  $v_{1.f} = -0.315 \text{ m/s}$ 

Unknown:

$$v_{2,f} = ?$$

Diagram:

PLAN

#### Choose an equation or situation:

Use the equation for the conservation of momentum to find the final velocity of  $m_2$ , the 0.030 kg marble.

$$m_1 \mathbf{v_{1,i}} + m_2 \mathbf{v_{2,i}} = m_1 \mathbf{v_{1,f}} + m_2 \mathbf{v_{2,f}}$$

Rearrange the equation to isolate the final velocity of  $m_2$ .

$$m_2 \mathbf{v_{2,f}} = m_1 \mathbf{v_{1,i}} + m_2 \mathbf{v_{2,i}} - m_1 \mathbf{v_{1,f}}$$

$$\mathbf{v_{2,f}} = \frac{m_I \mathbf{v_{1,i}} + m_2 \mathbf{v_{2,i}} - \mathbf{t} \ m_I \mathbf{v_{1,f}}}{m_2}$$

**3** SOLVE

#### Substitute the values into the equation and solve:

The rearranged conservation-of-momentum equation will allow you to isolate and solve for the final velocity.

$$v_{2f} = \frac{(0.015 \text{ kg})(0.225 \text{ m/s}) + (0.030 \text{ kg})(-0.180 \text{ m/s}) - (0.015 \text{ kg})(-0.315 \text{ m/s})}{0.030 \text{ kg}}$$

$$v_{2,f} = \frac{(3.4 \times 10 - 3 \text{ kg} \bullet \text{m/s}) + (-5.4 \times 10 - 3 \text{ kg} \bullet \text{m/s}) - (-4.7 \times 10 - 3 \text{ kg} \bullet \text{m/s})}{0.030 \text{ kg}}$$

$$v_{2f} = \frac{2.7 \times 10^{-3} \,\mathrm{kg} \cdot \mathrm{m/s}}{3.0 \times 10^{-2} \,\mathrm{kg}}$$

 $v_{2.f} = 9.0 \times 10^{-2} \,\text{m/s}$  to the right

Continued

### **Problem Solving**

#### **ALTERNATIVE APPROACHES**

Sometimes calculations in problems can be tedious, and, as a result, the solution process can become susceptible to errors. In such cases, it is a good idea to perform the calculations part by part. For example, students calculate the left side of the equation first. All the values are given for the left side. Then, replacing the value of the left side changes the form of the equation in such a way that the calculations become more straightforward.

Tony Anderson/Getty Images

#### Elastic Collisions (continued)

#### CHECK YOUR WORK

Confirm your answer by making sure kinetic energy is also conserved using these values.

Use the conservation of kinetic energy to check your work:

$$\frac{1}{2}\,m_{1}{v_{1,i}}^{2}+\frac{1}{2}\,m_{2}{v_{2,i}}^{2}=\frac{1}{2}\,m_{1}{v_{1,f}}^{2}+\frac{1}{2}\,m_{2}{\color{red}v_{2,f}}^{2}$$

$$KE_i = \frac{1}{2}(0.015 \text{ kg})(0.225 \text{ m/s})^2 + \frac{1}{2}(0.030 \text{ kg})(-0.180 \text{ m/s})^2 = 8.7 \times 10^{-4} \text{ kg} \cdot \text{m}^2/\text{s}^2 = 8.7 \times 10^{-4} \text{ J}$$

$$\begin{split} KE_f &= \frac{1}{2} (0.015 \text{ kg}) (0.315 \text{ m/s})^2 + \frac{1}{2} (0.030 \text{ kg}) (0.090 \text{ m/s})^2 = \\ & 8.7 \times 10^{-4} \text{ kg} \bullet \text{m}^2/\text{s}^2 = 8.7 \times 10^{-4} \text{ J} \end{split}$$

Kinetic energy is conserved.

- 1. A 0.015 kg marble sliding to the right at 22.5 cm/s on a frictionless surface makes an elastic head-on collision with a 0.015 kg marble moving to the left at 18.0 cm/s. After the collision, the first marble moves to the left at 18.0 cm/s.
  - a. Find the velocity of the second marble after the collision.
  - b. Verify your answer by calculating the total kinetic energy before and after the collision.
- 2. A 16.0 kg canoe moving to the left at 12.5 m/s makes an elastic head-on collision with a 14.0 kg raft moving to the right at 16.0 m/s. After the collision, the raft moves to the left at 14.4 m/s. Disregard any effects of the water.
  - a. Find the velocity of the canoe after the collision.
  - b. Verify your answer by calculating the total kinetic energy before and after the collision.
- 3. A 4.0 kg bowling ball sliding to the right at 8.0 m/s has an elastic head-on collision with another 4.0 kg bowling ball initially at rest. The first ball stops after the collision.
  - a. Find the velocity of the second ball after the collision.
  - b. Verify your answer by calculating the total kinetic energy before and after the collision.
- 4. A 25.0 kg bumper car moving to the right at 5.00 m/s overtakes and collides elastically with a 35.0 kg bumper car moving to the right. After the collision, the 25.0 kg bumper car slows to 1.50 m/s to the right, and the 35.0 kg car moves at 4.50 m/s to the right.
  - a. Find the velocity of the 35 kg bumper car before the collision.
  - b. Verify your answer by calculating the total kinetic energy before and after the collision.




> **[Differentiated Instruction — Below Level]**
>
> Ask students how it is possible for the total kinetic energy of the system to remain unchanged in an elastic collision, while the kinetic energy of any participating object may change. The energy is transferred from one object to another.
>

#### **PROBLEM guide G**

Use this guide to assign problems.

**SE** = Student Edition Textbook

**PW** = Sample Problem Set I (online)

**PB** = Sample Problem Set II (online)

#### **Solving for:**

| vf | SE | Sample, 1–3;<br>Ch. Rvw. 32–34, 46* |
|----|----|-------------------------------------|
|    | PW | Sample, 6–7                         |
|    | PB | 7–10                                |
| vi | SE | 4                                   |
|    | PW | Sample, 1–3                         |
|    | PB | 3–6                                 |
| m  | PW | 4–5                                 |
|    | PB | Sample, 1–2                         |

**\*Challenging Problem**

### **Answers**

#### **Practice G**

- **1. a.** 22.5 cm/s to the right
  - **b.** *KEi* = 6.2 × 10−<sup>4</sup> J = *KEf*
- **2. a.** 14.1 m/s to the right

**b.** 
$$KE_i = 3.04 \times 10^3 \text{ J},$$
  
 $KE_f = 3.04 \times 10^3 \text{ J},$   
so  $KE_i = KE_f$ 

- **3. a.** 8.0 m/s to the right
  - **b.** *KEi* = 1.3 × 102 J = *KEf*
- **4. a.** 2.0 m/s to the right
  - **b.** *KEi* = 382 J = *KEf*


#### **TEACH FROM VISUALS**

**FIGURE 3.4** Point out that the third case (inelastic) contains elements of both ideal cases. Total *KE* is not conserved, as in perfectly inelastic collisions, but the two objects do separate from one another after the collision, as in perfectly elastic collisions.

Ask What is common to all cases?

**Answer**: Momentum is conserved in each case.

### **▼** Assess and Reteach

**Assess** Use the Formative Assessment on this page to evaluate student mastery of the section.

**Reteach** For students who need additional instruction, download the Section Study Guide.

**Response to Intervention** To reassess students' mastery, use the Section Quiz, available to print or to take directly online at **HMDScience.com**.

| HUUHE 5.4           |                                                                                 |                                                                                                                                              |                            |  |  |  |  |  |
|---------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------|--|--|--|--|--|
| TYPES OF COLLISIONS |                                                                                 |                                                                                                                                              |                            |  |  |  |  |  |
| Type of Collision   | Diagram                                                                         | What Happens                                                                                                                                 | Conserved<br>Quantity      |  |  |  |  |  |
| perfectly inelastic | $m_1$ $V_{1,i}$ $V_{2,i}$ $m_2$ $V_1$ $p_1$ $p_2$ $p_1$ $p_2$ $p_3$ $p_4$ $p_5$ | The two objects stick<br>together after the<br>collision so that their final<br>velocities are the same.                                     | momentum                   |  |  |  |  |  |
| elastic             | $\begin{array}{cccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccc$                            | The two objects bounce after the collision so that they move separately.                                                                     | momentum<br>kinetic energy |  |  |  |  |  |
| inelastic           | $m_1$ $V_{1,i}$ $V_{2,i}$ $V_{2,i}$ $V_{1,f}$ $V_{2,f}$ $V_{2,f}$ $V_{2,f}$     | The two objects deform during the collision so that the total kinetic energy decreases, but the objects move separately after the collision. | momentum                   |  |  |  |  |  |


> **[Formative Assessment]**
>

#### Reviewing Main Ideas

FIGURE 3.4

- 1. Give two examples of elastic collisions and two examples of perfectly inelastic collisions.
- **2.** A 95.0 kg fullback moving south with a speed of 5.0 m/s has a perfectly inelastic collision with a 90.0 kg opponent running north at 3.0 m/s.
  - a. Calculate the velocity of the players just after the tackle.
  - **b.** Calculate the decrease in total kinetic energy after the collision.
- **3.** Two 0.40 kg soccer balls collide elastically in a head-on collision. The first ball starts at rest, and the second ball has a speed of 3.5~m/s. After the collision, the second ball is at rest.
  - a. What is the final speed of the first ball?
  - **b.** What is the kinetic energy of the first ball before the collision?
  - c. What is the kinetic energy of the second ball after the collision?

#### **Critical Thinking**

- **4.** If two automobiles collide, they usually do not stick together. Does this mean the collision is elastic?
- **5.** A rubber ball collides elastically with the sidewalk.
  - a. Does each object have the same kinetic energy after the collision as it had before the collision? Explain.
  - **b.** Does each object have the same momentum after the collision as it had before the collision? Explain.


> **[Answers to Section Assessment]**
>
> - 1. For elastic collisions, answers may include billiard balls colliding, a soccer ball hitting a player's foot, or a tennis ball hitting a wall. For inelastic collisions, answers may include a person catching a ball, a meteorite hitting Earth, or two clay balls colliding.
> - 2. a. 1.1 m/s to the south
> - **b.**  $1.4 \times 10^3 \, \text{J}$
> - **3. a.** 3.5 m/s
> - **b.** 0 J
> - **c.** 0 J
>
> - **4.** No, some *KE* is converted to sound energy and some is converted to internal elastic potential energy as the cars deform, so the collision cannot be elastic.
> - **5. a.** no; If the collision is perfectly elastic, total *KE* is conserved, but each object can gain or lose *KE*.
> - **b.** no; Total **p** is conserved, but each object can gain or lose **p**.
>

### **CAREERS IN PHYSICS**

# **High School Physics Teacher**

hysics teachers help students understand this branch of science both inside and outside the classroom. To learn more about teaching physics as a career, read this interview with Linda Rush, who teaches high school physics at Southside High School in Fort Smith, Arkansas

#### What does a physics teacher do every day?

I teach anywhere from 100 to 130 students a day. I also take care of the lab and equipment, which is sometimes difficult but necessary. In addition, physics teachers have to attend training sessions to stay current in the field.

#### What schooling did you take in order to become a physics teacher?

I have two college degrees: a bachelor's in physical science education and a master's in secondary education.

At first, I planned to go into the medical field but changed my mind and decided to become a teacher. I started out as a math teacher, but I changed to science because I enjoy the practical applications.

#### Did your family influence your career choice?

Neither of my parents went to college, but they both liked to tinker. They built an experimental solar house back in the 1970s. My dad rebuilt antique cars. My mom was a computer programmer. When we moved from the city to the country, my parents were determined that my sister and I wouldn't be helpless, so we learned how to do and fix everything.

#### What is your favorite thing about your job?

I like to watch my students learn—seeing that light bulb of understanding go on. Students can learn so much from one another. I hope that more students will take physics classes. So many students are afraid to try and don't have confidence in themselves

Linda Rush eniovs working with students. particularly with hands-on activities.

#### What are your students surprised to learn about you?

My students are often surprised to learn that I am a kayaker. a hiker, and the mother of five daughters. Sometimes they forget that teachers are real people.

#### What advice do you have for students who are interested in teaching physics?

Take as many lab classes in college as possible. Learn as many hands-on activities as you can to use in the classroom.

### **CAREERS IN PHYSICS**

### **High School Physics** Teacher

Linda Rush is well known at Southside for conducting skateboard experiments in the hallway, supporting a successful robotics program, and doing similar activities of interest to students. On a more somber note, she recently helped her students cope with the shock of losing a classmate in a traffic accident. But even an unexpected tragedy can bring home the importance of the topics that she teaches.

"When you can relate science to current events—the shuttle disaster, for example—students pay more attention," said Rush. "Science has real-world relevance."

Within the limits of state requirements, Rush tries to allow some flexibility in terms of what is being taught.

"Sometimes it helps to let your students direct you," she said. "It's funny what they find interesting and want to share with the class. It really varies."

