---
chapter: 7
chapter_title: Circular Motion and Gravitation
section: 2
section_title: SECTION 2
---

## **SECTION 2**



> **[Preview Vocabulary]**
>
> passing through the altitude. The intersecting part of these two shapes
>
> is called a parabola.
>
> **TEACH FROM VISUALS**
>
> **Teach**
>
> motion?
>
> weakens.
>
> **230 Chapter 7**
>
> speed is constant.
>
> **Scientific Meanings** *Parabola* is a geometric term that is widely used in many scientific and technical fields. A parabola is an open curve generated by intersecting a plane with a cone, such that the plane is parallel to a plane
>
> **FIGURE 2.1** Point out that the nature of the cannonball's path depends as much on the cannonball's tangential velocity as on the strength of the gravitational force. Have students compare the path of the cannonball when the ball's tangential speed is low with the paths of the projectiles that were studied in the chapter on two-dimensional motion. **Ask** How is the motion of an orbiting object similar to the motion of a projectile with two-dimensional
>
> **Answer**: The orbiting object has a constant tangential speed, just as the horizontal component of a projectile's
>
> **Ask** What happens when the speed of the projectile is so great that the force required to keep the projectile moving in a circle is larger than the gravitational
>
> **Answer**: The projectile continues on a curved path, moving farther away from Earth's center as the force due to gravity
>
> force acting on the projectile?
>
>

#### Objectives

Explain how Newton's law of universal gravitation accounts for various phenomena, including satellite and planetary orbits, falling objects, and the tides.

Apply Newton's law of universal gravitation to solve problems.

gravitational force the mutual force of attraction between particles of matter

Newton's Thought Experiment Each successive cannonball has a greater initial speed, so the horizontal distance that the ball travels increases. If the initial speed is great enough, the curvature of Earth will cause the cannonball to continue

falling without ever landing.


before it hits the ground.

**Inclusion**

**Differentiated Instruction**

Visual learners will benefit from a demonstration of the cannonball example shown in **Figure 2.1.** Make a ramp on the desktop using a pile of books as a support, and roll a steel ball down it. Let the ball roll off the desk and onto the floor. Changing the height of the ramp will change the speed of the ball as it leaves the desk and therefore the distance that the ball travels

FIGURE 2.1

# Newton's Law of Universal Gravitation

Earth and many of the other planets in our solar system travel in nearly circular orbits around the sun. Thus, a centripetal force must keep them in orbit. One of Isaac Newton's great achievements was the realization that the centripetal force that holds the planets in orbit is the very same force that pulls an apple toward the ground—gravitational force.

To see how this idea is true, we can use a thought experiment that Newton developed. Consider a cannon sitting on a high mountaintop, as shown in Figure 2.1. The path of each cannonball is a parabola, and the horizontal distance that each cannonball covers increases as the cannonball's initial speed increases. Newton realized that if an object were projected at just the right speed, the object would fall down toward Earth in just the same way that Earth curved out from under it. In other words, it would orbit Earth. In this case, the gravitational force between the cannonball and Earth is a centripetal force that keeps the cannonball in orbit. Satellites stay in orbit for this same reason. Thus, the force that pulls an apple toward Earth is the same force that keeps the moon and other satellites in orbit around Earth. Similarly, a gravitational attraction between Earth and

Key Term gravitational force

Gravitational Force

Orbiting objects are in free fall.

our sun keeps Earth in its orbit around the sun.


FIGURE 2.2

 $\mathbf{F}_{\mathrm{Em}} = -\mathbf{F}_{\mathrm{mE}}.$ 

 $F_{mE} = F_c$ 

Circular Motion and Gravitation

231


Gravitational Force The gravitational

force attracts Earth and the moon to each other. According to Newton's third law,

Newton demonstrated that the gravitational force that a spherical mass exerts on a particle outside the sphere would be the same if the entire mass of the sphere were concentrated at the sphere's center. When calculating the gravitational force between Earth and our sun, for exam-

Gravitational force always attracts objects to one another, as shown in Figure 2.2. The force that the moon exerts on Earth is equal and opposite to the force that Earth exerts on the moon. This relationship is an example of Newton's third law of motion. Also, note that the gravitational forces shown in Figure 2.2 are centripetal forces. Also, note that the gravitational force shown in Figure 2.2 that acts on the moon is the centripetal force that causes the moon to move in its almost circular path around Earth. The

centripetal force on Earth, however, is less obvious because Earth is much more massive than the moon. Rather than orbiting the moon, Earth

Gravitational force exists between any two masses, regardless of size. For instance, desks in a classroom have a mutual attraction because of

gravitational force. The force between the desks, however, is negligibly small relative to the force between each desk and Earth because of the

moves in a small circular path around a point inside Earth.

If gravitational force acts between all masses, why

To emphasize the concept discussed in the last paragraph of this page, ask students to calculate the acceleration of Earth toward an apple and to use the weight of the apple as the force of attraction. Give the following values for the

doesn't Earth accelerate up toward a falling apple? In fact, it does! But, Earth's acceleration

is so tiny that you cannot detect it. Because Earth's mass is so large and acceleration is inversely proportional to mass, the Earth's acceleration is negligible. The apple has a much smaller mass and thus a much greater

**Answer**:  $a_{Farth} = 2.5 \times 10^{-25} \text{ m/s}^2$ 

differences in mass.

acceleration.

calculation: 
$$\begin{split} m_{apple} &= 0.15 \text{ kg} \\ m_{Earth} &= 5.97 \times 10^{24} \text{ kg} \\ r_{Earth} &= 6.38 \times 10^6 \text{ m} \end{split}$$

**BELOW LEVEL** 

ple, you use the distance between their centers.

Gravitational force acts between all masses.

## **WHY IT MATTERS**

## **Black Holes**

black hole is an object that is so massive that nothing, not even light, can escape the pull of its gravity. In 1916, Karl Schwarzschild was the first person to suggest the existence of black holes. He used his solutions to Einstein's general-relativity equations to explain the properties of black holes. In 1967, the physicist John

Wheeler coined the term black hole to describe these

In order for an object to escape the gravitational pull of

a planet, such as Earth, the object must be moving away

from the planet faster than a certain threshold speed.

which is called the escape velocity. The escape velocity

at the surface of Earth is about  $1.1 \times 10^4$  m/s, or about

The escape velocity for a black hole is greater than the

speed of light. And, according to Einstein's special theory of

relativity, no object can move at a speed equal to or greater

than the speed of light. Thus, no object that is within a

certain distance of a black hole can move fast enough to

escape the gravitational pull of the black hole. That distance,

called the Schwarzschild radius, defines the edge, or horizon,

Newton's laws say that only objects with mass can be

subject to forces. How can a black hole trap light if light has

no mass? According to Einstein's general theory of relativity,

any object with mass bends the fabric of space and time

itself. When an object that has mass or even when a ray of light passes near another object, the path of the moving

object or ray curves because space-time itself is curved. The

curvature is so great inside a black hole that the path of any

light that might be emitted from the black hole bends back

This image from NASA's Chandra X-ray Observatory is of Sagittarius A\*, which is a supermassive black hole

at the center of our galaxy. Astronomers are studying

the image to learn more about Sagittarius A\* and about black holes in the centers of other galaxies.

toward the black hole and remains trapped inside the

objects.

25 000 mi/h.

of a black hole.

(bl) NASA/CXC/MIT/F.K.Baganoff et al.; (tr) ◎NASA/Photo Researchers, Inc.

horizon

orbiting a black hole. Such disks provide indirect

Because black holes trap light, they cannot be observed

directly. Instead, astronomers must look for indirect evidence

galaxies. By measuring the speed of the orbits, astronomers

hole—that must be at the galaxy's center. Black holes at the

centers of galaxies typically have masses millions or billions

The figure above shows a disk of material orbiting a black

hole. Material that orbits a black hole can move at such high

speeds and have so much energy that the material emits

X rays. From observations of the X rays coming from such

disks, scientists have discovered several black holes within

233

of black holes. For example, astronomers have observed

stars orbiting very rapidly around the centers of some

can calculate the mass of the dark object—the black

of times the mass of the sun.

our own galaxy.

evidence of black holes within our own galaxy.

## Why It Matters

#### **BLACK HOLES**

A black hole is an object whose escape velocity is greater than the speed of light. Escape velocity is independent of the mass of the escaping object. Understanding how a black hole can trap light, which has no mass, requires an

appeal to Einstein's general theory of

relativity. You can construct a simple

difficult concept of gravity as a curva-

ture of space-time. Attach a sheet of

place a heavy object in the center of the

sheet. The sheet will bend downward

into a cone. You can then roll a coin in

an orbit around the object in the center.

Point out to students that this is only a

rough three-dimensional model, while

The extreme bending of space-time

the curvature of space-time is four-

that prevents light from escaping the

Schwarzschild radius of a black hole

occurs in a less extreme form around

stars that are less compact than black

astronomers observed light, which came

holes. During a solar eclipse in 1922,

from a distant star, bend as the light

passed near the sun. This observation

was one of the first pieces of evidence to support Einstein's general theory of relativity. Direct students who wish to

learn more about general relativity to

Circular Motion and Gravitation

the feature "General Relativity."

dimensional.

flexible rubber to a hoop, and then

model to help students grasp the

spring tides and two neap tides.

High and Low Tides Some of the world's highest tides occur at the Bay of Fundy, which is between New Brunswick and Nova Scotia, Canada. These photographs show a river outlet to the Bay of Fundy at low and high tide.

FIGURE 2.3

**Teaching Tip**

easily extended.

**234 Chapter 7**

Point out that tidal forces are exerted on all substances and that the amount of distortion depends on the elasticity of the body under gravitational influence. The rocky surfaces of the moon and Earth also experience tidal forces, but the bulge is not as great as with Earth's oceans because rock is not as

If an orbiting body moves too close to a more massive body, the tidal force on the orbiting body may be large enough to break the body apart. The distance at which tidal forces can become destructive is called *Roche's limit*, after the 19th-century French mathematician Edouard Roche.


tidal force decreases as \_\_1

**Pre-AP**

**Differentiated Instruction**

Expand on the fact that tidal force arises from the difference between the gravitational forces at Earth's near surface, center, and far surface, and mention that this differential force is an inverse-cubed quantity. That is to say, as the distance *r* between two bodies increases, the

the sun has less effect on the Earth's ocean tides than the moon does, even though it has a much greater mass than the moon does.

*<sup>r</sup>*<sup>3</sup> . For this reason,

both bulges.

affects the tides.


(bl) ©Andrew J. Martinez/Photo Researchers, Inc. (br) ©Andrew J. Martinez/Photo Researchers, Inc.

The two high tides take place at locations on Earth that are nearly in line with the moon. On the side of Earth that is nearest to the moon, the moon's gravitational force is *greater* than it is at Earth's center (because gravitational force decreases with distance). The water is pulled toward the moon, creating an outward bulge. On the opposite side of Earth, the gravitational force is *less* than it is at the center. On this side, all mass is still pulled toward the moon, but the water is pulled least. This creates another outward bulge. Two high tides take place each day because when Earth rotates one full time, any given point on Earth will pass through

The moon's gravitational force is not the only factor that affects ocean tides. Other influencing factors include the depths of the ocean basins, Earth's tilt and rotation, and friction between the ocean water and the ocean floor. The sun also contributes to Earth's ocean tides, but the sun's effect is not as significant as the moon's is. Although the sun exerts a much greater gravitational force on Earth than the moon does, the *difference* between the force on the far and near sides of Earth is what

## **▼ Teach** continued

#### **Answers**


#### Conceptual Challenge

1. no; The distance from the center of the moon to the moon's surface is less than the distance between Earth's center and Earth's surface. These distances, along with the

masses of the two bodies, affect

2. The gold should be purchased at a

scheme is impractical, in part

because of transportation costs.)

high altitude, where the gold weighs

less, and sold at a low altitude, where the gold weighs more. (Even so, this

gravitational field strength.

#### FIGURE 2.5

#### Earth's Gravitational Field

The gravitational field vectors represent Earth's gravitational field at each point. Note that the field has the same strength at equal distances from Earth's center.

Conceptual Challenge

magnitude of g on the moon's

surface is about  $\frac{1}{6}$  of the value

you infer from this relationship that the moon's mass is  $\frac{1}{6}$  of

Earth's mass? Why or why not?

ing and selling gold at different altitudes for the same price per weight. Should the scam

artist buy or sell at the higher

**Differentiated Instruction** 

Ask students if they have heard about the

statement. Can astronauts reach absolute

them think about the exactness of this

"weightlessness" of astronauts in space. Have

weightlessness? Explain that astronauts never

reach a point at which they have no weight.

As astronauts move farther away from Earth's

small. No matter where any object is located

in the universe, however, it is always being

center, their weight will decrease until it is very

**PRE-AP** 

altitude? Explain.

Selling Gold A scam artist hopes to make a profit by buy-

of g on Earth's surface. Can

Gravity on the Moon The

At any point, Earth's gravitational field can be described by the *gravitational field strength*, abbreviated g. The value of g is equal to the magnitude of the gravitational force exerted on a unit mass at that point, or  $g = F_g/m$ . The gravitational field  $(\mathbf{g})$  is a vector with a magnitude of g that points in the direction of the gravitational force.

#### Gravitational field strength equals free-fall acceleration.

Consider an object that is free to accelerate and is acted on only by gravitational force. According to Newton's second law,  $\mathbf{a} = \mathbf{F}/m$ . As seen earlier,  $\mathbf{g}$  is defined as  $\mathbf{F}_{\mathbf{g}}/m$ , where  $\mathbf{F}_{\mathbf{g}}$  is gravitational force. Thus, the value of g at any given point is equal to the acceleration due to gravity. For this reason,  $g = 9.81 \text{ m/s}^2$  on Earth's surface. Although gravitational field strength and

free-fall acceleration are equivalent, they are not the same thing. For instance, when you hang an object from a spring scale, you are measuring

gravitational field strength. Because the mass is at rest (in a frame of

inverse-square nature of Newton's law of universal gravitation.

Weight changes with location.

location in the universe.

planet's mass and radius.

reference fixed to Earth's surface), there is no measurable acceleration.

Figure 2.5 shows gravitational field vectors at different points around

Earth. As shown in the figure, gravitational field strength rapidly decreases as the distance from Earth increases, as you would expect from the

In the chapter about forces, you learned that weight is the magnitude of

the force due to gravity, which equals mass times free-fall acceleration.

We can now refine our definition of weight as mass times gravitational

new definition helps to explain why your weight changes with your

field strength. The two definitions are mathematically equivalent, but our

Newton's law of universal gravitation shows that the value of g depends

on mass and distance. For example, consider a tennis ball of mass *m*. The gravitational force between the tennis ball and Earth is as follows:

 $F_{g} = \frac{Gmm_{E}}{r^{2}}$ 

 $g = \frac{F_g}{m} = \frac{Gmm_E}{mr^2} = \frac{Gm_E}{r^2}$ 

This equation shows that gravitational field strength depends only on mass and distance. Thus, as your distance from Earth's center increases, the value of *g* decreases, so your weight also decreases. On the surface of any planet, the value of *g*, as well as your weight, will depend on the

acted on by the gravity of some other object. Even though the gravitational effect of a

gravitation never equals zero. For this reason,

many scientists prefer the term *microgravity* 

sensation of weightlessness in an elevator or

due not to the absence of gravity, but to the

absence of a force balancing gravity.

when a car goes over a bump. This sensation is

Ask students if they have ever felt a brief

distant object may be minuscule, total

over weightlessness.

(bl) @C Squared Studios/Photodisc/Getty Images

Combining this equation with the definition for gravitational field

strength yields the following expression for *g*:

Circular Motion and Gravitation

3. a. 636 N

**b.** 475 N

**c.** 678 N

**d.** 656 N

5.  $5.98 \times 10^{24} \text{ kg}$ 

**4.**  $6.5 \text{ m/s}^2$ 

237

contrast, inertial mass is accelerated.

as in an Atwood's machine, where the

Assess and Reteach ▼

**Assess** Use the Formative Assessment

on this page to evaluate student

Reteach For students who need

additional instruction, download the

**Response to Intervention** To reassess

students' mastery, use the Section Quiz,

Circular Motion and Gravitation

available to print or to take directly

online at HMDScience.com.

of another falling mass.

mastery of the section.

Section Study Guide.

inertial mass accelerates under the force

all masses fall with the same acceleration (disregarding air resistance).

There is no obvious reason why the two types of masses should

be equal. For instance, the property of electric charges that causes

connection to gravitational or inertial mass. The equality between inertial and gravitational mass has been continually tested and has

**SECTION 2 FORMATIVE ASSESSMENT** 

1. Explain how the force due to gravity keeps a satellite in orbit.

weight of a 65.0 kg person at the following locations:

If so, explain why you don't observe any effects of this force.

**3.** Earth has a mass of  $5.97\times10^{24}$  kg and a radius of  $6.38\times10^6$  m, while Saturn has a mass of  $5.68\times10^{26}$  kg and a radius of  $6.03\times10^7$  m. Find the

4. What is the magnitude of g at a height above Earth's surface where free-

**5.** Suppose the value of G has just been discovered. Use the value of G and an approximate value for Earth's radius  $(6.38 \times 10^6 \, \mathrm{m})$  to find an approxi-

2. Is there gravitational force between two students sitting in a classroom?

thus far always held up.

Reviewing Main Ideas

a. on the surface of Earth

c. on the surface of Saturn

Critical Thinking

mation for Earth's mass.

b. 1000 km above the surface of Earth

d. 1000 km above the surface of Saturn

**Answers to Section Assessment** 

1. A satellite moves tangentially around

tional force. The combination

curvature of the planet.

a planet and would continue to move

in a straight line if there were no gravita-

of the acceleration due to gravity and the

extremely small because the masses of the students are small relative to Earth's mass.

tangential speed causes the satellite to

follow a path that is parallel to the

2. yes; The magnitude of the force is

fall acceleration equals 6.5 m/s<sup>2</sup>?

them to be attracted or repelled was originally called *electrical mass*. Even though this term has the word *mass* in it, electrical *mass* has no



Kepler's first law states that the planets' orbits are ellipses rather than circles. Kepler discovered this law while working with Brahe's data for the orbit of Mars. While trying to explain the data, Kepler experimented with 70 different circular orbits and generated numerous pages of calculations. He finally realized that if the orbit is an ellipse rather than a circle and the sun is at one focal point of the ellipse, the data fit perfectly.

Kepler's second law states that an imaginary line from the sun to any planet sweeps out equal areas in equal times, as shown in Figure 3.2. In other words, if the time a planet takes to travel the arc on the left  $(\Delta t_I)$  is equal to the time the planet takes to cover the arc on the right  $(\Delta t_2)$ , then the area  $A_I$  is equal to the area  $A_2$ .

It is easy to see from Figure 3.2 that planets travel faster

While Kepler's first two laws describe the motion of each planet

individually, his third law relates the orbital periods and distances of one planet to those of another planet. The orbital period (T) is the time a

planet takes to finish one full revolution, and the distance (r) is the mean

distance between the planet and the sun. Kepler's third law relates the orbital period and mean distance for two orbiting planets as follows:  $\frac{T_I{}^2}{T_2{}^2} = \frac{r_I{}^3}{r_2{}^3}, \text{ or } T^2 \propto r^3$  This law also applies to satellites orbiting Earth, including our moon. In that case, r is the distance between the orbiting satellite and Earth. The proportionality constant depends on the mass of the central object.

Kepler's laws are consistent with Newton's law of gravitation.

Newton used Kepler's laws to support his law of gravitation. For example, Newton proved that if force is inversely proportional to distance squared, as stated in the law of universal gravitation, the resulting orbit must be an ellipse or a circle. He also demonstrated that his law of gravitation could be used to derive Kepler's third law. (Try a similar derivation yourself in the QuickLab below.) The fact that Kepler's laws closely matched observations gave additional support for Newton's theory of gravitation.

KEPLER'S THIRD LAW

provided by the gravitational force.

Set the equations for gravitational

and centripetal force equal to one

another, and solve for  $v_t^2$ . Because

speed equals distance divided by

time and because the distance for

when they are closer to the sun.

Quick LAB

You can mathematically show

how Kepler's third law can be

derived from Newton's law of

universal gravitation (assuming

circular orbits). To begin, recall

TAKE IT FURTHER

Show students how the mass of a celestial object can be calculated if its radius and

 $GmT^2=4\pi^2r^3$  Rearrange the variables as follows to develop a formula for finding the mass of the satellite:

 $\frac{GmT^2}{GT^2} = \frac{4\pi^2r^3}{GT^2}$ 

 $m = \frac{4\pi^2 r^3}{GT^2}$ 

that the centripetal force is

**Problem Solving** 

period are known.

FIGURE 3.2

**Kepler's Second Law** This diagram illustrates a planet moving in an elliptical orbit around the sun. If  $\Delta t_1$  equals  $\Delta t_2$ , then the two shaded areas are equal. Thus, the planet travels faster when it is closer to the sun and slower when it is farther away.

one period is the circumference

value, substitute the squared value

into your previous equation, and

then isolate  $T^2$ . How does your

Circular Motion and Gravitation

result relate to Kepler's third law?

239

 $(2\pi r)$ ,  $v_t = 2\pi r/T$ . Square this

## QuickLab

#### **TEACHER'S NOTES**

orbited.

physics lab room.

Students should find that  $T^2 = \left(\frac{4\pi^2}{Gm}\right)r^3$ . This equation expresses that  $T^2$  is proportional to  $r^3$ , and that  $\frac{4\pi^2}{Gm}$  is the proportionality constant. This is a more detailed form of Kepler's third law

 $(T^2 \propto r^3)$ . Be sure students understand

that m is the mass of the object being

Homework Options This QuickLab can

Circular Motion and Gravitation

easily be performed outside of the

Mean

radius (m)

 $6.38 \times 10^{6}$ 

 $1.74 \times 10^{6}$ 

 $7.15 \times 10^{7}$ 

 $3.40 \times 10^{6}$ 

FIGURE 3.3

**Planet** 

Earth

Earth's

**Jupiter** 

**Problem Solving** 

TAKE IT FURTHER

their expression for  $v_t^2$ .

moon

Mass

 $5.97 \times 10^{24}$ 

 $7.35 \times 10^{22}$ 

 $1.90 \times 10^{27}$ 

 $6.42 \times 10^{23}$ 

**Mercury**  $3.30 \times 10^{23}$   $2.44 \times 10^{6}$ 

Have students use values in the table to confirm Kepler's third law. (They should get the same ratio of  $\frac{T^2}{r^3}$  for each planet.) Students who did the QuickLab on Kepler's third law can also see how the orbital speed equation is derived. They simply need to take the square root of

(kg)

can be ignored, other cases, such as the two stars in a binary star system, require

that one of the masses be known or realistically estimated. The masses of many stars are determined from the

stars' colors and levels of brightness.

the companions is small and thus hard

to see but is very massive. Examples of

small but massive bodies include white

dramatic example is a black hole. The

mass of the invisible companion can be

motions of a visible companion, whose mass can be estimated from its light.

dwarfs and neutron stars. A more

estimated by observing the orbital


Kepler's third law is especially useful for binary star systems in which one of

 $T = 2\pi \sqrt{\frac{r^3}{Gm}} \qquad v_t = \sqrt{G\frac{m}{r}}$ 

orbital period =  $2\pi\sqrt{\frac{(\text{mean radius})^3}{(\text{constant})(\text{mass of central object})}}$ 

Note that *m* in both equations is the mass of the central object that is

equal to Earth's mean radius plus the satellite's distance from Earth's

surface (its "altitude"). Figure 3.3 gives planetary data that can be used to

 $5.68 \times 10^{26}$   $6.03 \times 10^{7}$ 

 $1.99 \times 10^{30}$   $6.96 \times 10^{8}$ 

 $8.68 \times 10^{25}$   $2.56 \times 10^{7}$ 

 $4.87 \times 10^{24}$   $6.05 \times 10^{6}$ 

Mean

radius (m)

 $2.48 \times 10^{7}$ 

being orbited. The mass of the planet or satellite that is in orbit does not

affect its speed or period. The mean radius (r) is the distance between the centers of the two bodies. For an artificial satellite orbiting Earth, r is

orbital speed =  $\sqrt{\text{(constant)}}$ 

Mass

(kg)

**Neptune**  $1.02 \times 10^{26}$ 

calculate orbital speeds and periods.

**PLANETARY DATA** 

Saturn

Uranus

Venus

Sun

Mean distance Planet

from sun (m)

 $1.50 \times 10^{11}$ 

 $7.79 \times 10^{11}$ 

 $2.28\times10^{11}$ 

 $5.79 \times 10^{10}$ 

mass of central object

mean radius

Mean distance

from sun (m)

 $4.50 \times 10^{12}$ 

 $1.43 \times 10^{12}$ 

 $2.87 \times 10^{12}$ 

 $1.08 \times 10^{11}$ 

## **▼ Teach** continued

## QuickLab

#### **TEACHER'S NOTES**

five floors.


To perform this lab. select an elevator that accelerates through most of its trip between the top and ground floors.

Slow elevators tend to move at a

constant speed, so no change in the

scale reading will be observed after the

move. The measurements will be easier

moment when the elevator begins to

to make if the building has more than

## Quick LAB

#### MATERIALS

- elevator
- hathroom scale
- watch or stopwatch

#### **ELEVATOR ACCELERATION**

moves down.

FIGURE 3.4

In this activity, you will stand on a bathroom scale while riding an elevator up to the top

floor and then back. Stand on

the scale in a first-floor eleva-

tor, and record your weight. As

the elevator moves up, record

the scale reading for every

two-second interval. Repeat

Now, find the net force for

calculate the elevator's accel-

eration for each interval. How does the acceleration change?

pare with free-fall acceleration?

**Differentiated Instruction** 

A means to overcome apparent weightlessness

the spacecraft that is a cylinder rotating about

in space is to have a spacecraft or portion of

its central axis. Objects or people standing against the walls experience a normal force that is proportional to the square of the speed of the cylinder's rotation and is inversely proportional to the cylinder's radius. If the cylinder is rotated at the proper speed, the cylinder creates an "artificial gravity" that is

PRE-AP

Normal Force in an Elevator When this elevator accelerates.

the normal force acting on the person changes. If the elevator were in

Newton's second law to

How does the elevator's maximum acceleration com-

each time interval, and then use

the process as the elevator

#### **Weight and Weightlessness**

In the chapter about forces, you learned that weight is the magnitude of the force due to gravity. When you step on a bathroom scale, it does not actually measure your weight. The scale measures the downward force exerted on it. When your weight is the only downward force acting on the scale, the scale reading equals your weight. If a friend pushes down on you while you are standing on the scale, the scale reading will go up. However, your weight has not changed; the scale reading equals your weight plus the extra applied force. Because of Newton's third law, the downward force you exert on the scale equals the upward force exerted on you by the scale (the normal force). Thus, the scale reading is equal to the normal force acting on you.

For example, imagine you are standing in an elevator, as illustrated in

Figure 3.4. When the elevator is at rest, as in Figure 3.4(a), the magnitude of

record your weight. When the elevator begins accelerating downward, as

record an amount that is less than your weight. If the elevator's accelera-

the normal force is equal to your weight. A scale in the elevator would

in Figure 3.4(b), the normal force will be smaller. The scale would now

tion were equal to free-fall acceleration, as shown in Figure 3.4(c), you

would be falling at the same rate as the elevator and would not feel the

force of the floor at all. In this case, the scale would read zero. You still

free-fall acceleration. In other words, no normal force is acting on you.

weightlessness. Because the shuttle is accelerating at the same rate as the astronauts are, this example is similar to the elevator in Figure 3.4(c).

free fall, the normal force would drop to zero and the person

would experience a sensation of apparent weightlessness.

equal to the gravitational field strength at

Earth's surface. Have students investigate the

the normal force that creates the sensation

of gravity.

relationship between the centripetal force and

have the same weight, but you and the elevator are both falling with

Astronauts in orbit experience apparent weightlessness.

Astronauts floating in a space shuttle are experiencing apparent

This situation is called apparent weightlessness.

**SECTION 3 FORMATIVE ASSESSMENT** Reviewing Main Ideas

does Kepler's first law of planetary motion refine Copernicus's model? 2. Does a planet in orbit around the sun travel at a constant speed? How do 3. Suppose you know the mean distance between both Mercury and the sun and Venus and the sun. You also know the period of Venus's orbit around the sun. How can you find the period of Mercury's orbit? 4. Explain how Kepler's laws of planetary motion relate to Newton's law of universal gravitation.

1. Compare Ptolemy's model of the solar system with Copernicus's. How

5. Find the orbital speed and period of Earth's moon. The average distance between the centers of Earth and of the moon is  $3.84 \times 10^8$  m. Critical Thinking **6.** An amusement park ride raises people high into the air, suspends them for a moment, and then drops them at the rate of free-fall acceleration. Is a person in this ride experiencing apparent weightlessness, true weightlessness, or neither? Explain.

7. Suppose you went on the ride described in item 6, held a penny in front of you, and released the penny at the moment the ride started to drop. What would you observe? **Answers to Section Assessment** 

1. Both Ptolemy's and Copernicus's

orbits with ellipses.

**2.** no; a planet moves faster as it comes

closer to the sun because, in accordance

models used circular orbits to describe the motions of planets. However, in 3. Use Kepler's third law: Ptolemy's model, the planets and the sun moved around a motionless Earth, whereas in Copernicus's model, the  $T_{M} = T_{v} \sqrt{\frac{r_{M}^{3}}{r_{v}^{3}}}$ planets and Earth moved around the sun. Kepler replaced Copernicus's circular

on Earth, it will take the person ten seconds to reach the ground.

Assess and Reteach ▼ **Assess** Use the Formative Assessment on this page to evaluate student mastery of the section. Reteach For students who need additional instruction, download the Section Study Guide. **Response to Intervention** To reassess students' mastery, use the Section Quiz, available to print or to take directly

online at HMDScience.com.

Circular Motion and Gravitation first law. It also explains Kepler's third law with Kepler's second law, it sweeps out equal areas in equal time intervals. for circular orbits. **5.**  $v_{\star} = 1.02 \times 10^3 \,\text{m/s};$  $T = 2.37 \times 10^6 \text{ s} = 27.4 \text{ days}$ **6.** apparent weightlessness; The normal force is zero because the person is in free fall. 7. You would see the penny float in front

Circular Motion and Gravitation

of you. 4. Newton demonstrated that an inversesquare force is necessary to produce an elliptical orbit, as predicted by Kepler's


**SECTION 4**

#### The Magnitude of a Torque

Imagine a cat trying to leave a house by pushing perpendicularly on a cat-flap door. Figure 4.2 shows a cat-flap door hinged at the top. In this configuration, the door is free to rotate around a line that passes through the hinge. This is the door's *axis of rotation*. When the cat pushes at the bottom edge of the door with a force that is perpendicular to the door, the door opens. The ability of a force to rotate an object around some axis is measured by a quantity called torque.

rotate. How easily an object rotates depends not only on how much force is applied but also on where the force is applied. The farther the force is from the axis of rotation, the easier it is to rotate the object and the more torque is produced. The perpendicular distance from the axis of rotation to a line drawn along the direction of the force is called the lever arm.

Figure 4.3 shows a diagram of the force **F** applied by the pet perpendicular to the cat-flap door. If you examine the definition of *lever arm*, you will see that in this case the lever arm is the distance *d* shown in the figure, the distance from the pet's nose to the hinge. That is, *d* is the perpendicular distance from the axis of rotation to the line along which the applied force acts. If the pet pressed on the door at a higher point, the lever arm would be shorter. As a result, the cat would need to exert

## Torque depends on the force and the lever arm.

If a cat pushed on the door with the same force but at a point closer to the hinge, the door would be more difficult to

a greater force to apply the same torque.

Torque A force applied to an extended object can produce a torque. This torque, in turn, causes the object

In this activity, you will explore how the amount of force required to open a door changes when the lever arm changes. Using only perpendicular forces, open a door several times by applying a force at different distances from the hinge. You may have to tape the latch so that the door will open

to rotate.

FIGURE 4.3

#### FIGURE 4.2

axis of rotation

*d*

**F**

CHANGING THE LEVER ARM

when you push without turning the knob. Because the angle of the applied force is kept constant, decreasing the distance to the hinge decreases the lever arm. Compare the relative effort required to open the door when pushing near the edge to that required when pushing near

Hinge Rotation The cat-flap door rotates on a hinge, allowing pets to enter and leave a house at will.

torque a quantity that measures the ability of a force to rotate an object

lever arm the perpendicular distance from the axis of rotation to a line drawn along the direction of the force

around some axis

the hinged side of the door. Summarize your findings in terms of torque and the lever arm.


MATERIALS • door • masking tape

## **QuickLab**

#### **Teacher's Notes**

physics lab room.

Students should find that the smallest lever arm (closest to the hinge) requires the greatest force to produce the same torque.

**Homework Options** This QuickLab can easily be performed outside of the

Circular Motion and Gravitation **245**

FIGURE 4.5

**Torque and Direction** The direction

of the lever arm is always perpendicular to

the direction of the applied force.

**Tips and Tricks** 

with each torque.

**BELOW LEVEL** 

example of using torque.

To determine the sign of a torque,

imagine that the force is the only force acting on the object and that

the object is free to rotate. Visualize

the direction that the object would

careful to associate the correct sign

Differentiated Instruction

Having some real-life examples can help students understand the concept of torque and how it works. Ask students to find some daily uses of torque and discuss their findings to see whether their examples are appropriate. For example, tell students that rotating the lid of a bottle is an example of applying torque. Moving a seesaw up and down is another

rotate. If more than one force is acting, treat each force separately. Be

and (c), the door will still rotate, but not as easily. The symbol for torque is

the Greek letter  $tau(\tau)$ , and the magnitude of the torque is given by the

 $\tau = Fd \sin \theta$ 

 $torque = force \times lever arm$ 

The SI unit of torque is the N•m. Notice that the inclusion of the factor  $\sin \theta$  in this equation takes into account the changes in torque shown

Figure 4.5 shows a wrench pivoted around a bolt. In this case, the applied force acts at an angle to the wrench. The quantity d is the distance from the axis of rotation to the point where force is applied. The quantity  $d\sin\theta$ , however, is the *perpendicular* distance from the axis of rotation to a line drawn along the direction of the force. Thus,  $d\sin\theta$  is the lever arm. Note that the perpendicular distance between the door hinge and the point of application of force **F** in Figure 4.4 decreases as the cat goes

Torque, like displacement and force, is a vector quantity. In this textbook,

we will assign each torque a positive or negative sign, depending on the

direction the force tends to rotate an object. We will use the convention

that the sign of the torque resulting from a force is positive if the rotation

is counterclockwise and negative if the rotation is clockwise. In calcula-

tions, remember to assign positive and negative values to forces and

displacements according to the sign convention established in the

following equation:

further through the door.

The Sign of a Torque

chapter "Motion in One Dimension."

Torque

the handle of a wrench, which makes

help the mechanic?

to a stubborn bolt.


the handle longer. How do cheater bars

**Answer**: Cheater bars increase the lever

arm length while keeping the force the

same, thus increasing the torque applied

## **▼ Teach** continued

#### **Answers**

#### **Practice E**

- **1.** 0.75 N•m
- **2. a.** 5.1 N•m
  - **b.** 15 N•m

**TEACH FROM VISUALS** 

the lever arm is long.

handle?

would equal 1.


**FIGURE 4.6** Point out that the reason the bottle opener is so useful is that the length of the handle is longer than the

distance between the rim, which pries the bottle cap up, and the cap itself. The

amount of force needed to produce a

Ask Would the bottle opener still

provide a mechanical advantage if the

**Answer**: No, if both the "prying arm"

and the handle were the same length,

the force input would equal the force output, and the mechanical advantage

"prying arm" were equal in length to the

large torque on the cap is small because

**3.** 133 N

#### Torque (continued)

#### Practice

A Lever Because this bottle

opener makes work easier, it is

an example of a machine.

**Problem Solving** 

applied force and lever arm.

**ALTERNATIVE APPROACHES** 

Another way to calculate torque is to use the full distance from the pivot point to the applied force and to use only the perpendicular component of the applied force. The magnitude of this "effective force" is equal to  $F \sin \theta$ . The resulting torque will be equal to the result that would be obtained using the

- 1. Find the magnitude of the torque produced by a  $3.0\,\mathrm{N}$  force applied to a door at a perpendicular distance of  $0.25\,\mathrm{m}$  from the hinge.
- 2. A simple pendulum consists of a 3.0 kg point mass hanging at the end of a 2.0 m long light string that is connected to a pivot point.

3. If the torque required to loosen a nut on the wheel of a car has a magnitude of

40.0 N•m, what minimum force must be exerted by a mechanic at the end of a

**Types of Simple Machines** 

examples of machines.

Using simple machines.

written as follows:

What do you do when you need to pry a cap off a bottle of soda? You probably use a bottle opener, as shown in Figure 4.6. Similarly, you would

probably use scissors to cut paper or a hammer to drive a nail into a

board. All of these devices make your task easier. These devices are all

ored wires and complex gear-and-pulley systems. Compared with inter-

nal-combustion engines or airplanes, simple devices such as hammers,

scissors, and bottle openers may not seem like machines, but they are.

or modifications of six fundamental types of machines, called simple

A machine is any device that transmits or modifies force, usually by changing the force applied to an object. All machines are combinations

machines. These six simple machines are the lever, pulley, inclined plane, wheel and axle, wedge, and screw, as shown in Figure 4.7 on the next page.

Because the purpose of a simple machine is to change the direction or magnitude of an input force, a useful way of characterizing a simple machine is to compare how large the output force is relative to the input force. This ratio, called the machine's *mechanical advantage*, is

 $MA = \frac{\text{output force}}{\text{input force}} = \frac{F_{out}}{F_{in}}$ 

The term machine may bring to mind intricate systems with multicol-

- $\textbf{a.} \ \ Calculate the magnitude of the torque (due to gravitational force) around this pivot point when the string makes a 5.0° angle with the vertical.$
- $\boldsymbol{b.}\;$  Repeat this calculation for an angle of 15.0°.

30.0 cm wrench to loosen the nut?

Tips and Tricks

This equation can be used to predict

the output force for a given input

force if there is no friction. The

expected, and thus  $\frac{d_{in}}{d}$  will not

249

Circular Motion and Gravitation

equation is not valid if friction is taken into account. With friction, the output force will be less than

One example of mechanical advantage is the use of the back of a hammer to pry a nail from a board. In this example, the hammer is a type of lever. A person applies an input force to one end of the handle. The handle, in turn, exerts an output force on the head of a nail stuck in a board. If friction is disregarded, the input torque will equal the

 $\tau_{in} = \tau_{out}$   $F_{in} d_{in} = F_{out} d_{out}$ 

Substituting this expression into the definition of mechanical advantage

 $MA = \frac{F_{out}}{F_{in}} = \frac{d_{in}}{d_{out}}$ 

The longer the input lever arm as compared with the output lever arm,

the greater the mechanical advantage is. This in turn indicates the factor by which the input force is amplified. If the force of the board on the nail is 99 N and if the mechanical advantage is 10, then an input force of 10 N is enough to pull out the nail. Without a machine, the nail could not be

output torque. This relation can be written as follows:

removed unless the input force was greater than 99 N.

Building acrostics may help students remember lists, such as a list of the six simple machines. Students should be encouraged to create their own acrostics, because they will be more likely to recall words of their own choosing. You may want to give them an example like the following: "Let People Wander When the Party Starts," for Lever, inclined Plane, Wheel and

Differentiated Instruction

**ENGLISH LEARNERS** 

axle, Wedge, Pulley, and Screw.

gives the following result:

advantage. If  $F_{\it out}$  is the measured output

force, then the ratio  $\frac{F_{out}}{F_{ln}}$  will give the actual mechanical advantage, and  $\frac{F_{out}}{F_{ln}}$  will not equal  $\frac{d_{ln}}{d_{out}}$ . On the other hand, if the equality on this page is used to calculate

Circular Motion and Gravitation

 $F_{out}$  then  $F_{out}$  is the predicted output force in an ideal situation with no

friction.

FIGURE 4.8

#### Reviewing Main Ideas

- 1. Determine whether each of the following situations involves linear motion, rotational motion, or a combination of the two.
  - a. a baseball dropped from the roof of a house
  - b. a baseball rolling toward third base
  - c. a pinwheel in the wind
  - d. a door swinging open
- 2. What quantity describes the ability of a force to rotate an object? How does it differ from a force? On what quantities does it depend?
- 3. How would the force needed to open a door change if you put the handle in the middle of the door?
- **4.** What are three ways that a cat pushing on a cat-flap door can change the amount of torque applied to the door?
- 5. The efficiency of a squeaky pulley system is 73 percent. The pulleys are used to raise a mass to a certain height. What force is exerted on the machine if a rope is pulled 18.0 m in order to raise a 58 kg mass a height of 3.0 m?
- 6. A person lifts a 950 N box by pushing it up an incline. If the person exerts a force of 350 N along the incline, what is the mechanical advantage of the incline?
- 7. You are attempting to move a large rock by using a long lever. Will the work you do on the lever be greater than, the same as, or less than the work done by the lever on the rock? Explain.

#### **Interpreting Graphics**

- 8. Calculate the torque for each force acting on the bar in Figure 4.10. Assume the axis is perpendicular to the page and passes through point O. In what direction will the object rotate?
- 9. Figure 4.11 shows an example of a Rube Goldberg machine. Identify two types of simple machines that are included in this compound machine.

#### Critical Thinking

10. A bicycle can be described as a combination of simple machines. Identify two types of simple machines that are used to propel a typical bicycle.


**Assess** Use the Formative Assessment on this page to evaluate student mastery of the section.

Reteach For students who need additional instruction, download the Section Study Guide.

**Response to Intervention** To reassess students' mastery, use the Section Quiz, available to print or to take directly online at HMDScience.com.


> **[Answers to Section Assessment]**
>
> Circular Motion and Gravitation
>
> - 1. a. linear motion
> - **b.** linear and rotational motion
> - c. rotational motion
> - **d.** rotational motion
> - 2. torque; It is measured in units of N•m, not N. It is a measure of the ability of a force to accelerate an object around an axis; It depends on the force and the lever arm.
> - 3. Twice as much force would be needed to open the door.
> - **4.** by changing the point at which the force is applied, the angle at which the force is applied, or the magnitude of the applied force
> - 5, 130 N
> - **6.** 2.7
> - 7. Ideally, the amounts of work will be the same, but because no machine is perfectly efficient, the work you do will be greater.
> - **8.**  $\tau_{30} = 0$  N·m,  $\tau_{25} = +43$  N·m,  $\tau_{10} = -16$ N•m; The bar will rotate counterclockwise.
>
> - 9. Possible answers include lever, wedge, and pulley.
> - 10. the wheels (wheel and axle) and the gear system (pulley)
>
> **TAKE IT FURTHER**
>
> **[Demonstration]**
>

#### **TANGENTIAL SPEED VERSUS ANGULAR SPEED**

Purpose Show that tangential speed depends on radius.

Materials two tennis balls attached to different lengths of string (approx. 1.0 m and 1.5 m)

Procedure Outside on an athletic field, hold the ends of both strings and whirl the tennis balls at constant angular speed over your head. Point out the equal angular speeds of the tennis balls. Ask students to predict the flights of the tennis balls when the strings are released.

Aiming away from students and any breakable items, release the strings and have students observe the flights. Discuss the longer horizontal displacement of the outer ball as a function of its greater tangential speed.

#### **TEACH FROM VISUALS**

FIGURE 1 Point out to students that each horse is a different distance away from the center of the carousel.

Ask Which horse would travel farther before hitting the ground if the horses were released from the carousel?

**Answer**: The outer horse would travel farther because it has a greater tangential speed.

# **Tangential Speed** and Acceleration

This feature explores the concepts of tangential speed and acceleration in greater detail. Be sure you have also read the feature titled "Angular Kinematics."

#### Tangential Speed

Imagine an amusement-park carousel rotating about its center. Because a carousel is a rigid object, any two horses attached to the carousel have the same angular speed and angular acceleration. However, if the two horses are different distances from the axis of rotation, they have different tangential speed. The tangential speed of a horse on the carousel is its speed along a line drawn tangent to its circular path.

The tangential speeds of two horses at different distances from the center of a carousel are represented in Figure 1. Note that the two horses travel the same angular displacement during the same time interval. To achieve this, the horse on the outside must travel a greater distance ( $\Delta s$ ) than the horse on the inside. Thus, the outside horse at point B has a greater tangential speed than the inside horse at point A. In general, an object that is farther from the axis of a rigid rotating body must travel at a higher tangential speed to cover the same angular displacement as would an object closer to the axis.

If the carousel rotates through an angle  $\theta$ , a horse rotates through an arc length  $\Delta s$  in the interval  $\Delta t$ . To find the tangential speed, start with the equation for angular displacement:

$$\Delta \theta = \frac{\Delta s}{r}$$

Next, divide both sides of the equation by the time it takes to travel  $\Delta s$ :

$$\frac{\Delta \theta}{\Delta t} = \frac{\Delta s}{r \Delta t}$$

The left side of the equation equals  $\omega_{avg}$ . Also,  $\Delta s$  is a linear distance, so  $\Delta s$  divided by  $\Delta t$  is a linear speed along an arc length. If  $\Delta t$  is very short, then  $\Delta s$  is so small that it is nearly tangent to the circle; therefore,  $\Delta s/\Delta t$  is the tangential speed,  $v_{\star}$ 

**Tangential Speed** 

$$v_{\star} = r\omega$$

tangential speed = distance from axis  $\times$  angular speed

Tangential Speed Horses on a carousel move at the same angular speed but different tangential speeds.


Here,  $\omega$  is the instantaneous angular speed, rather than the average angular speed, because the time interval is so short. This equation is valid only when  $\omega$  is measured in radians per unit of time. Other measures of angular speed must not be used in this equation.

#### **Tangential Acceleration**

If a carousel speeds up, the horses experience an angular acceleration. The linear acceleration related to this angular acceleration is tangent to the circular path and is called the **tangential acceleration**. If an object rotating about a fixed axis changes its angular speed by  $\Delta\omega$  in the interval  $\Delta t$ , the tangential speed of a point on the object has changed by the amount  $\Delta v_t$ . Dividing the equation for tangential speed by  $\Delta t$  results in

$$\Delta v_t = r \Delta \omega$$

$$\frac{\Delta v_t}{\Delta t} = r \frac{\Delta \omega}{\Delta t}$$

If the time interval  $\Delta t$  is very small, then the left side of this relationship gives the tangential acceleration of the point. The angular speed divided by the time interval on the right side is the angular acceleration. Thus, the tangential acceleration  $(a_i)$  of a point on a rotating object is given by the following relationship:

#### **Tangential Acceleration**

 $a_t = r\alpha$ 

tangential acceleration = distance from axis  $\times$  angular acceleration

The angular acceleration in this equation refers to the instantaneous angular acceleration. This equation must use the unit radians to be valid. In SI, angular acceleration is expressed as radians per second per second.

#### **Finding Total Acceleration**

Any object moving in a circle has a centripetal acceleration. When both components of acceleration exist simultaneously, the tangential acceleration is tangent to the circular path and the centripetal acceleration points toward the center of the circular path. Because these components of acceleration are perpendicular to each other, the magnitude of the *total acceleration* can be found using the Pythagorean theorem, as follows:

$$a_{total} = \sqrt{a_t^2 + a_c^2}$$

The direction of the total acceleration, as shown in Figure 2, depends on the magnitude of each component of acceleration and can be found using the inverse of the tangent function. Note that when there is a tangential acceleration, the tangential speed is changing, and thus this situation is not an example of uniform circular motion.

Circular Motion and Gravitation

253

#### **Classroom Practice**

#### **TANGENTIAL SPEED**

A golfer has a maximum angular speed of 6.3 rad/s for her swing. She can choose between two drivers, one placing the club head 1.9 m from her axis of rotation and the other placing it 1.7 m from the axis.

- **a.** Find the tangential speed of the club head for each driver.
- **b.** All other factors being equal, which driver is likely to hit the ball farther?

#### **Answers**

- **a.** 12 m/s, 11 m/s
- **b.** The longer driver will hit the ball farther because its club head has a higher tangential speed.

#### **TANGENTIAL ACCELERATION**

A yo-yo has a tangential acceleration of 0.98 m/s² when it is released. The string is wound around a central shaft of radius 0.35 cm. What is the angular acceleration of the yo-yo?

**Answer**:  $2.8 \times 10^2 \text{ rad/s}^2$ 


> **[Teaching Tip]**
>
> To simulate the large accelerations involved in spaceflight, *Mercury* astronauts rode in the U. S. Navy's centrifuge in Johnsville, Pennsylvania. The astronauts sat in a gondola at the end of a 15.2 m arm that spun around a central axis. During the spin, the astronauts experienced a combination of centripetal and tangential accelerations of the gondola that ranged from 8 to 10 times the acceleration due to gravity.
>
> Point out that objects rotate around their center of mass *in the absence of other forces*. For example, a ruler thrown through the air will rotate around its own center of mass because air resistance is evenly distributed and produces zero net torque. However, a ruler with an index card taped to one end will not rotate around its own center of mass when it is thrown through the air because the card provides air resistance, which in turn produces a torque.
>
> **[Teaching Tip]**
>
> Let students examine objects that have a center of mass outside the object itself, such as a doughnut, a coat hanger, or a boomerang.
>

# Rotation and Inertia

In this feature, you will explore the concept of rotational inertia.

#### Center of Mass

You have learned that torque measures the ability of a force to rotate an object around some axis, such as a cat-flap door rotating on a hinge. Locating the axis of rotation for a cat-flap door is simple: It rotates on its hinges because the house applies a force that keeps the hinges in place.

Now imagine you are playing fetch with your dog, and you throw a stick up into the air for the dog to retrieve. Unlike the cat-flap door, the stick is not attached to anything. There is a special point around which the stick rotates if gravity is the only force acting on the stick. This point is called the stick's center of mass.

The center of mass is also the point at which all the mass of the body can be considered to be concentrated (for translational motion). This means that the complete motion of the stick is a combination of both translational and rotational motion. The stick rotates in the air around its

> center of mass. The center of mass, in turn, moves as if the stick were a point mass, with all of its mass concentrated at that point for purposes of analyzing its translational motion. For example, the hammer in Figure 1 rotates about its center of mass as it moves through the air. As the rest of the hammer spins, the center of mass moves along the parabolic path of a projectile.

For regularly shaped objects, such as a sphere or a cube, the center of mass is at the geometric center of the object. For more complicated objects, finding the center of mass is more difficult. Although the center of mass is the position at which an extended object's mass can be treated as a point mass, the *center of gravity* is the position at which the gravitational force acts on the extended object as if it were a point mass. For many situations, the center of mass and the center of gravity are equivalent.

Center of Mass The point around which this hammer rotates is the hammer's center of mass. The center of mass traces out the parabola that is characteristic of projectile motion.


#### **Moment of Inertia**


**Shape** 

You may have noticed that it is easier to rotate a baseball bat around some axes than others. The resistance of an object to changes in rotational motion is measured by a quantity called the **moment of interia**.

The moment of inertia, which is abbreviated as *I*, is similar to mass because they are both forms of inertia. However, there is an important difference between them. Mass is an intrinsic property of an object, and the moment of inertia is not. The moment of inertia depends on the object's mass and the distribution of that mass around the axis of rotation. The farther the mass of an object is, on average, from the axis of rotation, the greater is the object's moment of inertia and the more difficult it is to rotate the object.

resulting acceleration of the object depends on the object's mass. Similarly, when a net torque acts on an object, the resulting change in the rotational

motion of the object depends on the object's moment of inertia. (This law is

get an idea of the size of this unit, note that bowling balls typically have

moments of inertia about an axis through their centers ranging from about 0.7 kg $\bullet$ m² to 1.8 kg $\bullet$ m², depending on the mass and size of the ball.

Some simple formulas for calculating the moment of inertia of common shapes are shown in Figure 2. The units for moment of inertia are  $kg \bullet m^2$ . To

THE MOMENT OF INERTIA FOR VARIOUS RIGID OBJECTS OF MASS  $\it M$ 

**Shape** 

thin rod about

through center

pendicular axis

through end

diameter

perpendicular axis

thin rod about per-

solid sphere about

thin spherical shell

about diameter

**Moment** 

of inertia

 $MR^2$ 

 $\frac{1}{2}MR^2$ 

 $MR^2$ 

 $\frac{1}{2}MR^2$ 

covered in more detail in the feature "Rotational Dynamics.")

thin hoop about

symmetry axis

thin hoop about

diameter

point mass

about axis

disk or cylinder about

symmetry axis

According to Newton's second law, when a net force acts on an object, the


> **[Did You Know?]**
>
> too long (large  $\ell$ ).
>
> Moment
>
> of inertia
>
> $\frac{1}{12}M\ell^2$
>
> $\frac{1}{2}M\ell^2$
>
> $\frac{2}{5}MR^2$
>
> $\frac{2}{3}MR^2$
>
> Circular Motion and Gravitation
>
> 255
>
> A baseball bat can be modeled as a rotating thin rod. When a bat is held at its end, its length is greatest with respect to the rotation axis, so its moment of inertia is greatest. Thus, the bat is easier to swing if you hold the bat closer to the center. Baseball players sometimes do this either because a bat is too heavy (large *M*) or
>
> **[Demonstration]**
>

#### **MOMENT OF INERTIA OF A ROD**

**Purpose** Give visual examples of the two cases of a thin rod and the case of a cylinder described in **Figure 2**.

volunteers assist by trying the various

Thin rod about perpendicular axis

back and forth through half rotations at

Rotate the rod through half circles in the

same time interval as previously used.

(corresponding to the larger moment

Cylinder: Hold the rod vertically between your palms with your fingers

Note the increased force required

extended. Rotate the cylinder by

required in this case.

moving your palms back and forth in the same regular time interval as used

previously. Note the much smaller force

Circular Motion and Gravitation

through center: Hold the rod in the

center with one hand. Rotate the rod

regular time intervals. Note the force

required to change the motion.

Thin rod about perpendicular axis through end: Hold rod at one end.

**Materials** broomstick or dowel **Procedure** If possible, let student

demonstrations.

of inertia).

moves. How is this possible?

**Physics**

clockwise torques.

**Teaching Tip**

an unknown in the problem.

**256 Chapter 7**

Another way to state the second equilibrium condition is to say that the sum of the clockwise torques must equal the sum of the counter-

Students may be confused about which axis of rotation to choose when applying the second condition for equilibrium to an object. Tell students that any axis can be used; the resultant torque acting on an object in rotational equilibrium is independent of where the axis is placed. This fact is useful in solving rotational equilibrium problems because an unknown force that acts along a line passing through this axis of rotation will not produce any torque. Beginning a diagram by arbitrarily setting an axis where a force acts can eliminate


forces balance each other. But it does; it rotates in place.

Newton's Second Law for Rotation

law is expressed mathematically as follows:

calculate an object's angular acceleration.

*for equilibrium*.

The piece of furniture can move even though the net force acting on it is zero because the net torque acting on it is not zero. If the net force on an object is zero, the object is in *translational equilibrium*. If the net torque on an object is zero, the object is in *rotational equilibrium*. For an object to be completely in equilibrium, both rotational and translational, there must be both zero net force and zero net torque. The dependence of equilibrium on the absence of net torque is called the *second condition* 

Just as net force is related to translational acceleration according to Newton's second law, there is a relationship between the net torque on an object and the angular acceleration given to the object. Specifically, the net torque on an object is equal to the moment of inertia times the angular acceleration. This relationship is parallel to Newton's second law of motion and is known as Newton's second law for rotating objects. This

Newton's Second Law for Rotating Objects

*τnet* = *Iα* **net torque** = **moment of inertia** × **angular acceleration**

This equation shows that a net positive torque corresponds to a positive angular acceleration, and a net negative torque corresponds to a negative angular acceleration. Thus, it is important to keep track of the signs of the torques acting on the object when using this equation to

Circular Motion and Gravitation

## PHYSICS ON THE EDGE


> **[Teaching Tip]**
>
>
> Encourage students who are interested in this feature to read portions of Einstein's popular account of the theories of special and general relativity, titled *Relativity: The Special and the General Theory.* In the first few chapters of Part II of his book, Einstein discusses the equivalence between gravitational and inertial mass and introduces the thought
>
> experiment described in this feature.
>

## **PHYSICS ON THE EDGE**

# **General Relativity**

**Equivalence** Einstein discovered that there is no way to distinguish between

(a) a gravitational field and (b) an accelerating reference frame.


Special relativity applies only to nonaccelerating reference frames. Einstein expanded his special theory of relativity into the general theory to cover all cases, including accelerating reference frames.

Einstein began with a simple question: "If we pick up a stone and then

because it is attracted by gravitational force. As usual, Einstein was not satisfied with this typical answer. He was also intrigued by the fact that in a vacuum, all objects in free fall have the same acceleration, regardless of their mass. As you learned in the chapter on gravity, the reason is that gravitational mass is equal to inertial mass. Because the two masses are equivalent, the extra gravitational force from a larger gravitational mass is exactly canceled out by its larger inertial mass, thus producing the same acceleration. Einstein considered this equivalence to be a great puzzle.

To explore these questions, Einstein used a thought experiment similar to the one shown in Figure 1. In Figure 1(a), a person in an elevator

at rest on Earth's surface drops a ball.

The ball is in free fall and accelerates downward, as you would expect. In Figure 1(b), a similar elevator in space is moving upward with a constant acceleration. If an astronaut in this elevator releases a ball, the floor accelerates up toward the ball. To the astronaut, the ball appears to be accelerating downward, and this situation is identical to the situation described in (a). In other words, the astronaut may think that his spaceship is on Earth and that the ball falls because of gravitational attraction. Because gravitational mass equals inertial mass, the astronaut cannot conduct any experiments to distinguish between the two cases. Einstein described this realization as "the happiest thought of my life."

let it go, why does it fall to the ground?" You might answer that it falls

Gravitational Attraction and Accelerating Reference Frames

A Mass in Space-Time In the theory of general relativity, masses distort four-dimensional space-time, as illustrated here. This distortion creates the effect we describe as gravitational attraction.


Circular Motion and Gravitation **259**



Curved Space-Time

the distorted space-time.

these two theories.

For example, imagine rolling a tennis ball across a water bed. If the water bed is flat, the tennis ball will roll straight across. If you place a heavy bowling ball in the center, the bowling ball changes the shape of the water bed. As a result, the tennis ball will then follow a curved path, which, in Newton's theory, is due to the gravitational force between the two. In general relativity, the tennis ball is simply following the curved path of space-time, which is distorted by the bowling ball. Unlike Newton's *mathematical* theory of gravitation, Einstein's theory of curved space-time offers a *physical* explanation for gravitational force. Today, Einstein's theory of general relativity is well accepted. However, scientists have not yet been able to incorporate it with another wellaccepted theory that describes things at the microscopic level: quantum mechanics. Many scientists are now working toward a unification of

Although light traveling near a massive object such as the sun appears to bend, is it possible that the light is actually following the straightest path? Einstein theorized that the answer to this question is yes. In general relativity, the three dimensions of space and the one dimension of time are considered together as four-dimensional space-time. When no masses are present, an object moves through "flat" space-time. Einstein proposed that masses change the shape of space-time, as shown in Figure 2. A light ray that bends near the sun is following the new shape of

Summary


**CHAPTER summary**

**260 Chapter 7**

#### Review CHAPTER 7

## Circular Motion

#### REVIEWING MAIN IDEAS

perpendicular to the velocity.

tangential acceleration.

CONCEPTUAL QUESTIONS

acceleration?

PRACTICE PROBLEMS

keys?

the sock?

- 1. When a solid wheel rotates about a fixed axis, do all of the points of the wheel have the same tangential speed?
- 2. Correct the following statement: The racing car rounds the turn at a constant velocity of 145 km/h.
- 3. Describe the path of a moving body whose ac cel eration is constant in magnitude at all times and is

 4. Give an example of a situation in which an automobile driver can have a centripetal acceleration but no

 5. The force exerted by a spring increases as the spring stretches. Imagine that you attach a heavy object to one end of a spring and then, while holding the spring's other end, whirl the spring and object in a horizontal circle. Does the spring stretch? Explain. 6. Can a car move around a circular racetrack so that the car has a tangential acceleration but no centripetal

7. Why does mud fly off a rapidly turning wheel?

 8. A building superintendent twirls a set of keys in a circle at the end of a cord. If the keys have a centripetal acceleration of 145 m/s2 and the cord has a length of 0.34 m, what is the tangential speed of the

 9. A sock stuck to the side of a clothes-dryer barrel has a centripetal acceleration of 28 m/s2. If the dryer barrel has a radius of 27 cm, what is the tangential speed of

For problems 8–9, see Sample Problem A.

#### For problems 10–11, see Sample Problem B.

10.0 m

track?

Gravitation

REVIEWING MAIN IDEAS

gravitational forces.

by the sun on Earth?

not completely accurate.

*A*

 11. Tarzan tries to cross a river by swinging from one bank to the other on a vine that is 10.0 m long. His speed at the bottom of the swing is 8.0 m/s. Tarzan does not know that the vine has a breaking strength of 1.0 × 103 N. What is the largest mass that Tarzan can have and still make it safely across the river?

Newton's Law of Universal

12. Identify the influence of mass and distance on

satellite not fall and crash into Earth?

13. If a satellite orbiting Earth is in free fall, why does the

 14. How does the gravitational force exerted by Earth on the sun compare with the gravitational force exerted

15. Describe two situations in which Newton's laws are


- 10. A roller-coaster car speeds down a hill past point *A* and then rolls up a hill past point *B*, as shown below.
  - a. The car has a speed of 20.0 m/s at point *A*. If the track exerts a normal force on the car of 2.06 × 104 N at this point, what is the mass of the car? (Be sure to account for gravitational force.)

15.0 m

*B*

b. What is the maximum speed the car can have at point *B* for the gravitational force to hold it on the

