---
chapter: 7
chapter_title: Circular Motion and Gravitation
section: 4
section_title: SECTION 4
---

### **SECTION 4**



> **[Preview Vocabulary]**
>
> **Scientific Meanings** The word *torque* is a technical word with no common usage. It is widely used in physics and mechanics. *Torque* is used to describe something that generates or tends to generate rotation or torsion.
>

### **Teach**


> **[Misconception Alert]**
>
> Many students may think that any force acting on an object will produce a torque. You may want to demonstrate that if you push an object at its center of mass without rotating the object, you are applying a force to the object without producing a torque.
>

#### **TEACH FROM VISUALS**

**FIGURE 4.1** Point out that the pins were initially at rest and were set in motion by the bowling ball.

**Ask** Is the energy gained by the pins greater than, equal to, or less than the energy lost by the bowling ball?

**Answer**: The energy gained by the pins is equal to the energy lost by the bowling ball (except for a small loss of energy in the form of sound and a slight temperature increase in the pins).


#### Objectives

Distinguish between torque and force.

Calculate the magnitude of a torque on an object.

Identify the six types of simple machines.

Calculate the mechanical advantage of a simple machine.

# Torque and Simple Machines

Key Terms

torque lever arm

#### Rotational Motion

Earlier you studied various examples of uniform circular motion, such as a spinning Ferris wheel or an orbiting satellite. During uniform circular motion, an object moves in a circular path and at constant speed. An object that is in circular motion is accelerating because the direction of the object's velocity is constantly changing. This centripetal acceleration is directed toward the center of the circle. The net force causing the acceleration is a centripetal force, which is also directed toward the center of the circle.

In this section, we will examine a related type of motion: the motion of a rotating rigid object. For example, consider a football that is spinning as it flies through the air. If gravity is the only force acting on the football, the football spins around a point called its *center of mass*. As the football moves through the air, its center of mass follows a parabolic path. Note that the center of mass is not always at the center of the object.

#### Rotational and translational motion can be separated.

Imagine that you roll a strike while bowling. When the bowling ball strikes the pins, as shown in Figure 4.1, the pins spin in the air as they fly backward. Thus, they have both rotational and linear motion. These types of motion can be analyzed separately. In this section, we will isolate rotational motion. In particular, we will explore how to measure the ability of a force to rotate an object.



Types of Motion Pins that are

FIGURE 4.1


> **[Differentiated Instruction — Pre-AP]**
>
> Expand the definition of rotational motion by including the concept of "circular motion." A circular motion is a common form of rotational motion in which every point on a rigid object moves in a circular path. The axis passing through the center of this circle is called the axis of rotation.
>

#### The Magnitude of a Torque

Imagine a cat trying to leave a house by pushing perpendicularly on a cat-flap door. Figure 4.2 shows a cat-flap door hinged at the top. In this configuration, the door is free to rotate around a line that passes through the hinge. This is the door's *axis of rotation*. When the cat pushes at the bottom edge of the door with a force that is perpendicular to the door, the door opens. The ability of a force to rotate an object around some axis is measured by a quantity called torque.

#### Torque depends on the force and the lever arm.

If a cat pushed on the door with the same force but at a point closer to the hinge, the door would be more difficult to rotate. How easily an object rotates depends not only on how much force is applied but also on where the force is applied. The farther the force is from the axis of rotation, the easier it is to rotate the object and the more torque is produced. The perpendicular distance from the axis of rotation to a line drawn along the direction of the force is called the lever arm.

Figure 4.3 shows a diagram of the force **F** applied by the pet perpendicular to the cat-flap door. If you examine the definition of *lever arm*, you will see that in this case the lever arm is the distance *d* shown in the figure, the distance from the pet's nose to the hinge. That is, *d* is the perpendicular distance from the axis of rotation to the line along which the applied force acts. If the pet pressed on the door at a higher point, the lever arm would be shorter. As a result, the cat would need to exert a greater force to apply the same torque.

FIGURE 4.2

Hinge Rotation The cat-flap door rotates on a hinge, allowing pets to enter and leave a house at will.

torque a quantity that measures the ability of a force to rotate an object around some axis

lever arm the perpendicular distance from the axis of rotation to a line drawn along the direction of the force

FIGURE 4.3

Torque A force applied to an extended object can produce a torque. This torque, in turn, causes the object to rotate.

#### CHANGING THE LEVER ARM

In this activity, you will explore how the amount of force required to open a door changes when the lever arm changes. Using only perpendicular forces, open a door several times by applying a force at different distances from the hinge. You may have to tape the latch so that the door will open when you push without turning the knob. Because the angle of the applied force is kept constant, decreasing the distance to the hinge decreases the lever arm. Compare the relative effort required to open the door when pushing near the edge to that required when pushing near

the hinged side of the door. Summarize your findings in terms of torque and the lever arm.

#### MATERIALS

- door
- masking tape


### **QuickLab**

#### **Teacher's Notes**

Students should find that the smallest lever arm (closest to the hinge) requires the greatest force to produce the same torque.

**Homework Options** This QuickLab can easily be performed outside of the physics lab room.

### **▼ Teach** continued

#### **TEACH FROM VISUALS**

FIGURE 4.5 Be certain students recognize how to identify the force, the distance to the axis, the angle between the force and the axis, and the lever arm.

Ask Mechanics often use "cheater bars" to loosen stubborn bolts. A cheater bar is usually a length of pipe that fits over the handle of a wrench, which makes the handle longer. How do cheater bars help the mechanic?

**Answer**: Cheater bars increase the lever arm length while keeping the force the same, thus increasing the torque applied to a stubborn bolt.

**Torque and Angles** In each example, the cat is pushing on the door at the same distance from the axis. To produce the same torque, the cat must apply greater force for smaller angles.

The lever arm depends on the angle.

#### FIGURE 4.5

**Torque and Direction** The direction of the lever arm is always perpendicular to the direction of the applied force.

# Torque

following equation:

 $\tau = Fd \sin \theta$ 

Forces do not have to be perpendicular to an object to cause the object to rotate. Imagine the cat-flap door again. In Figure 4.4(a), the force exerted

by the cat is perpendicular to d. When the angle is less than 90°, as in (b)

the Greek letter  $tau(\tau)$ , and the magnitude of the torque is given by the

and (c), the door will still rotate, but not as easily. The symbol for torque is

 $torque = force \times lever arm$ 

The SI unit of torque is the N•m. Notice that the inclusion of the factor  $\sin \theta$  in this equation takes into account the changes in torque shown

Figure 4.5 shows a wrench pivoted around a bolt. In this case, the applied force acts at an angle to the wrench. The quantity d is the distance from the axis of rotation to the point where force is applied. The quantity  $d \sin \theta$ , however, is the *perpendicular* distance from the axis of rotation to a line drawn along the direction of the force. Thus,  $d \sin \theta$  is the lever arm. Note that the perpendicular distance between the door hinge and the point of application of force F in Figure 4.4 decreases as the cat goes further through the door.

#### **Tips and Tricks**

To determine the sign of a torque, imagine that the force is the only force acting on the object and that the object is free to rotate. Visualize the direction that the object would rotate. If more than one force is acting, treat each force separately. Be careful to associate the correct sign with each torque.

#### The Sign of a Torque

Torque, like displacement and force, is a vector quantity. In this textbook, we will assign each torque a positive or negative sign, depending on the direction the force tends to rotate an object. We will use the convention that the sign of the torque resulting from a force is positive if the rotation is counterclockwise and negative if the rotation is clockwise. In calculations, remember to assign positive and negative values to forces and displacements according to the sign convention established in the chapter "Motion in One Dimension."



> **[Differentiated Instruction — Below Level]**
>
> Having some real-life examples can help students understand the concept of torque and how it works. Ask students to find some daily uses of torque and discuss their findings to see whether their examples are appropriate. For example, tell students that rotating the lid of a bottle is an example of applying torque. Moving a seesaw up and down is another example of using torque.
>
> For example, imagine that you are pulling on a wishbone with a perpendicular force *F1* and that a friend is pulling in the opposite direction with a force *F2*. If you pull the wishbone so that it would rotate counterclockwise, then you exert a positive torque of magnitude *F1d1*. Your friend, on the other hand, exerts a negative torque, –*F2 d2*. To find the net torque acting on the wishbone, simply add up the individual torques.
>
> $$\boldsymbol{\tau}_{net} = \boldsymbol{\Sigma}\boldsymbol{\tau} = \boldsymbol{\tau}_1 + \boldsymbol{\tau}_2 = \boldsymbol{F}_1\boldsymbol{d}_1 + (-\boldsymbol{F}_2\boldsymbol{d}_2)$$
>
> When you properly apply the sign convention, the sign of the net torque will tell you which way the object will rotate, if at all.
>

#### Torque

Sample Problem E **A basketball is being pushed by two players during tip-off. One player exerts an upward force of 15 N at a perpendicular distance of 14 cm from the axis of rotation. The second player applies a downward force of 11 N at a perpendicular distance of 7.0 cm from the axis of rotation. Find the net torque acting on the ball about its center of mass.**

ANALYZE Given: 
$$F_1 = 15 \text{ N}$$
  $F_2 = 11 \text{ N}$ 

$$d_1 = 0.14 \,\mathrm{m}$$
  $d_2 = 0.070 \,\mathrm{m}$ 

Unknown: *τnet* = ?

Diagram: see right

Interactive Demo HMDScience.com

**PREMIUM CONTENT**

#### PLAN **Choose an equation or situation:**

Apply the definition of torque to each force, and add up the individual torques.

$$\tau = Fd$$

$$\tau_{net} = \tau_1 + \tau_2 = F_1 d_1 + F_2 d_2$$

#### HRW • Holt Physics Tips and Tricks

PH99PE-C08-001-011-A The factor sin *θ* is not included because each given distance is the perpendicular distance from the axis of rotation to a line drawn along the direction of the force.

#### SOLVE **Substitute the values into the equations and solve:**

First, determine the torque produced by each force. Use the standard convention for signs.

$$\tau_I = F_I d_I = (15 \text{ N})(-0.14 \text{ m}) = -2.1 \text{ N} \bullet \text{m}$$

$$\tau_2 = F_2 d_2 = (-11 \text{ N})(0.070 \text{ m}) = -0.77 \text{ N} \bullet \text{m}$$

$$\tau_{net} = -2.1 \,\mathrm{N} \cdot \mathrm{m} - 0.77 \,\mathrm{N} \cdot \mathrm{m}$$

$$\tau_{net} = -2.9 \,\mathrm{N} \bullet \mathrm{m}$$

The net torque is negative, so the ball rotates in a clockwise direction.

#### Continued

### **Problem Solving**


#### **Take It Further**

Show students how to solve a torque problem when the force is not applied at a perpendicular angle. For example, the force may be applied at an angle of 60°. In that case, the following formula must be used:

$$\tau = Fd\sin\phi$$

### **Classroom Practice**

#### **Torque**

A student pushes with a minimum force of 50.0 N on the middle of a door to open it.

- **a.** What minimum force must be applied at the edge of the door in order for the door to open?
- **b.** What minimum force must be applied to the hinged side of the door in order for the door to open?

#### **Answers**

- **a.** 25.0 N
  - **b.** The door cannot be opened by a force at the hinge location. It can be broken but cannot be opened normally.

#### **PROBLEM guide E**

Use this guide to assign problems.

**SE** = Student Edition Textbook

**PW** = Sample Problem Set I (online)

**PB** = Sample Problem Set II (online)

#### **Solving for:**

| τ | SE | Sample, 1–2; Ch.<br>Rvw. 37–38, 43 44*,<br>51a, 54 |
|---|----|----------------------------------------------------|
|   | PW | 6, 7a                                              |
|   | PB | 4–6                                                |
| d | PW | Sample, 1–2, 3*                                    |
|   | PB | 7–10                                               |
| F | SE | 3; Ch. Rvw. 41–42,<br>51b, 54                      |
|   | PW | 4*, 5*, 7b                                         |
|   | PB | Sample, 1–3                                        |

**\*Challenging Problem**

### **▼ Teach** continued

#### **Answers**

#### Practice E

- 1. 0.75 N·m
- **2. a.** 5.1 N•m
  - **b.** 15 N•m
- **3.** 133 N

#### **TEACH FROM VISUALS**

FIGURE 4.6 Point out that the reason the bottle opener is so useful is that the length of the handle is longer than the distance between the rim, which pries the bottle cap up, and the cap itself. The amount of force needed to produce a large torque on the cap is small because the lever arm is long.

Ask Would the bottle opener still provide a mechanical advantage if the "prying arm" were equal in length to the handle?

**Answer**: No, if both the "prying arm" and the handle were the same length, the force input would equal the force output, and the mechanical advantage would equal 1.

#### Torque (continued)

#### Practice

- 1. Find the magnitude of the torque produced by a 3.0 N force applied to a door at a perpendicular distance of 0.25 m from the hinge.
- 2. A simple pendulum consists of a 3.0 kg point mass hanging at the end of a 2.0 m long light string that is connected to a pivot point.
  - **a.** Calculate the magnitude of the torque (due to gravitational force) around this pivot point when the string makes a 5.0° angle with the vertical.
  - **b.** Repeat this calculation for an angle of  $15.0^{\circ}$ .
- 3. If the torque required to loosen a nut on the wheel of a car has a magnitude of 40.0 N•m, what minimum force must be exerted by a mechanic at the end of a 30.0 cm wrench to loosen the nut?

A Lever Because this bottle opener makes work easier, it is an example of a machine.

#### **Types of Simple Machines**

What do you do when you need to pry a cap off a bottle of soda? You probably use a bottle opener, as shown in Figure 4.6. Similarly, you would probably use scissors to cut paper or a hammer to drive a nail into a board. All of these devices make your task easier. These devices are all examples of machines.

The term machine may bring to mind intricate systems with multicolored wires and complex gear-and-pulley systems. Compared with internal-combustion engines or airplanes, simple devices such as hammers, scissors, and bottle openers may not seem like machines, but they are.

A machine is any device that transmits or modifies force, usually by changing the force applied to an object. All machines are combinations or modifications of six fundamental types of machines, called simple machines. These six simple machines are the lever, pulley, inclined plane, wheel and axle, wedge, and screw, as shown in Figure 4.7 on the next page.

#### Using simple machines.

Because the purpose of a simple machine is to change the direction or magnitude of an input force, a useful way of characterizing a simple machine is to compare how large the output force is relative to the input force. This ratio, called the machine's mechanical advantage, is written as follows:

$$MA = \frac{\text{output force}}{\text{input force}} = \frac{F_{out}}{F_{in}}$$

### **Problem Solving**

#### **ALTERNATIVE APPROACHES**

Another way to calculate torque is to use the full distance from the pivot point to the applied force and to use only the perpendicular component of the applied force. The magnitude of this "effective force" is equal to  $F \sin \theta$ . The resulting torque will be equal to the result that would be obtained using the applied force and lever arm.

One example of mechanical advantage is the use of the back of a hammer to pry a nail from a board. In this example, the hammer is a type of lever. A person applies an input force to one end of the handle. The handle, in turn, exerts an output force on the head of a nail stuck in a board. If friction is disregarded, the input torque will equal the output torque. This relation can be written as follows:

$$\tau_{in} = \tau_{out}$$

$$F_{in} d_{in} = F_{out} d_{out}$$

Substituting this expression into the definition of mechanical advantage gives the following result:

$$MA = \frac{F_{out}}{F_{in}} = \frac{d_{in}}{d_{out}}$$

The longer the input lever arm as compared with the output lever arm, the greater the mechanical advantage is. This in turn indicates the factor by which the input force is amplified. If the force of the board on the nail is 99 N and if the mechanical advantage is 10, then an input force of 10 N is enough to pull out the nail. Without a machine, the nail could not be removed unless the input force was greater than 99 N.

#### **Tips and Tricks**

This equation can be used to predict the output force for a given input force if there is no friction. The equation is not valid if friction is taken into account. With friction, the output force will be less than expected, and thus  $\frac{d_{in}}{d_{out}}$  will not equal  $\frac{F_{out}}{E}$ .

249


Circular Motion and Gravitation


> **[Differentiated Instruction — English Learners]**
>
> Building acrostics may help students remember lists, such as a list of the six simple machines. Students should be encouraged to create their own acrostics, because they will be more likely to recall words of their own choosing. You may want to give them an example like the following: "Let People Wander When the Party Starts," for Lever, inclined Plane, Wheel and axle, Wedge, Pulley, and Screw.
>

# The Language of Physics

The ideal mechanical advantage (IMA) refers to the mechanical advantage that would exist if there were no friction. Thus,  $IMA = \frac{d_{in}}{d_{out}}$ . The actual mechanical advantage (AMA) takes friction into account. Because there is always some friction, the ideal mechanical advantage is always greater than the actual mechanical advantage. If  $F_{out}$  is the measured output force, then the ratio  $\frac{F_{out}}{F_{in}}$  will give the actual mechanical advantage, and  $\frac{F_{out}}{F_{in}}$  will not equal  $\frac{d_{in}}{d_{out}}$ . On the other hand, if the equality on this page is used to calculate  $F_{out}$ , then  $F_{out}$  is the predicted output force in an ideal situation with no friction.



> **[Misconception Alert]**
>
> Reinforce the idea that machines do not create something from nothing. If friction is disregarded, machines use the same amount of energy to achieve the goal. Use numerical examples to illustrate that the work done on the objects is the same. Show the trade-off between force and distance.
>
> **[Teaching Tip]**
>
> If you have discussed the difference between ideal and actual mechanical advantage with students, point out that efficiency can also be calculated with the ratio  $\frac{AMA}{IMA}$  because this ratio is equivalent to the ratio  $\frac{W_{in}}{W_{out}}$ .
>

#### FIGURE 4.8

An Inclined Plane Lifting this trunk directly up requires more force than pushing it up the ramp, but the same amount of work is

#### **Changing Force or Distance**

Simple machines can alter both the force needed to perform a task and the distance through which the force

Large distance—Small force

#### Machines can alter the force and the distance moved.

You have learned that mechanical energy is conserved in the absence of friction. This law holds for machines as well. A machine can increase (or decrease) the force acting on an object at the expense (or gain) of the distance moved, but the product of the two—the work done on the object-is constant.

For example, Figure 4.8 shows two examples of a trunk being loaded onto a truck. Figure 4.9 illustrates both examples schematically. In one example, the trunk is lifted directly onto the truck. In the other example, the trunk is pushed up an incline into the truck.

In the first example, a force  $(\mathbf{F}_1)$  of 360 N is required to lift the trunk, which moves through a distance  $(d_1)$  of 1.0 m. This requires 360 N•m of work (360 N  $\times$  1 m). In the second example, a lesser force ( $\mathbf{F}_2$ ) of only 120 N would be needed (ignoring friction), but the trunk must be pushed a greater distance ( $d_2$ ) of 3.0 m. This also requires 360 N•m of work (120 N  $\times$  3 m). As a result, the two methods require the same amount of energy.

#### Efficiency is a measure of how well a machine works.

The simple machines we have considered so far are ideal, frictionless machines. Real machines, however, are not frictionless. They dissipate energy. When the parts of a machine move and contact other objects, some of the input energy is dissipated as sound or heat. The efficiency of a machine is the ratio of useful work output to work input. It is defined by the following equation:

$$eff = \frac{W_{out}}{W_{in}}$$

If a machine is frictionless, then mechanical energy is conserved. This means that the work done on the machine (input work) is equal to the work done by the machine (output work) because work is a measure of energy transfer. Thus, the mechanical efficiency of an ideal machine is 1, or 100 percent. This is the best efficiency a machine can have. Because all real machines have at least a little friction, the efficiency of real machines is always less than 1.



> **[Differentiated Instruction — Below Level]**
>
> Have students write a brief description of the differences between force and torque. Ask them to share their descriptions with the class. Encourage other students to ask questions.
>

#### Reviewing Main Ideas

- 1. Determine whether each of the following situations involves linear motion, rotational motion, or a combination of the two.
  - a. a baseball dropped from the roof of a house
  - b. a baseball rolling toward third base
  - c. a pinwheel in the wind
  - d. a door swinging open
- 2. What quantity describes the ability of a force to rotate an object? How does it differ from a force? On what quantities does it depend?
- 3. How would the force needed to open a door change if you put the handle in the middle of the door?
- **4.** What are three ways that a cat pushing on a cat-flap door can change the amount of torque applied to the door?
- 5. The efficiency of a squeaky pulley system is 73 percent. The pulleys are used to raise a mass to a certain height. What force is exerted on the machine if a rope is pulled 18.0 m in order to raise a 58 kg mass a height of 3.0 m?
- 6. A person lifts a 950 N box by pushing it up an incline. If the person exerts a force of 350 N along the incline, what is the mechanical advantage of the incline?
- 7. You are attempting to move a large rock by using a long lever. Will the work you do on the lever be greater than, the same as, or less than the work done by the lever on the rock? Explain.

#### **Interpreting Graphics**

- 8. Calculate the torque for each force acting on the bar in Figure 4.10. Assume the axis is perpendicular to the page and passes through point O. In what direction will the object rotate?
- 9. Figure 4.11 shows an example of a Rube Goldberg machine. Identify two types of simple machines that are included in this compound machine.

#### Critical Thinking

10. A bicycle can be described as a combination of simple machines. Identify two types of simple machines that are used to propel a typical bicycle.


**Assess** Use the Formative Assessment on this page to evaluate student mastery of the section.

Reteach For students who need additional instruction, download the Section Study Guide.

Response to Intervention To reassess students' mastery, use the Section Quiz, available to print or to take directly online at HMDScience.com.


> **[Answers to Section Assessment]**
>
> Circular Motion and Gravitation
>
> 251
>
> - 1. a. linear motion
> - **b.** linear and rotational motion
> - c. rotational motion
> - **d.** rotational motion
> - 2. torque; It is measured in units of N•m, not N. It is a measure of the ability of a force to accelerate an object around an axis; It depends on the force and the lever arm.
> - 3. Twice as much force would be needed to open the door.
> - **4.** by changing the point at which the force is applied, the angle at which the force is applied, or the magnitude of the applied force
> - 5, 130 N
> - **6.** 2.7
> - 7. Ideally, the amounts of work will be the same, but because no machine is perfectly efficient, the work you do will be greater.
> - **8.**  $\tau_{30} = 0$  N·m,  $\tau_{25} = +43$  N·m,  $\tau_{10} = -16$ N•m; The bar will rotate counterclockwise.
>
> - 9. Possible answers include lever, wedge, and pulley.
> - 10. the wheels (wheel and axle) and the gear system (pulley)
>
> **TAKE IT FURTHER**
>
> **[Demonstration]**
>

#### **TANGENTIAL SPEED VERSUS ANGULAR SPEED**

Purpose Show that tangential speed depends on radius.

Materials two tennis balls attached to different lengths of string (approx. 1.0 m and 1.5 m)

Procedure Outside on an athletic field, hold the ends of both strings and whirl the tennis balls at constant angular speed over your head. Point out the equal angular speeds of the tennis balls. Ask students to predict the flights of the tennis balls when the strings are released.

Aiming away from students and any breakable items, release the strings and have students observe the flights. Discuss the longer horizontal displacement of the outer ball as a function of its greater tangential speed.

#### **TEACH FROM VISUALS**

FIGURE 1 Point out to students that each horse is a different distance away from the center of the carousel.

Ask Which horse would travel farther before hitting the ground if the horses were released from the carousel?

**Answer**: The outer horse would travel farther because it has a greater tangential speed.

# **Tangential Speed** and Acceleration

This feature explores the concepts of tangential speed and acceleration in greater detail. Be sure you have also read the feature titled "Angular Kinematics."

#### Tangential Speed

Imagine an amusement-park carousel rotating about its center. Because a carousel is a rigid object, any two horses attached to the carousel have the same angular speed and angular acceleration. However, if the two horses are different distances from the axis of rotation, they have different tangential speed. The tangential speed of a horse on the carousel is its speed along a line drawn tangent to its circular path.

The tangential speeds of two horses at different distances from the center of a carousel are represented in Figure 1. Note that the two horses travel the same angular displacement during the same time interval. To achieve this, the horse on the outside must travel a greater distance ( $\Delta s$ ) than the horse on the inside. Thus, the outside horse at point B has a greater tangential speed than the inside horse at point A. In general, an object that is farther from the axis of a rigid rotating body must travel at a higher tangential speed to cover the same angular displacement as would an object closer to the axis.

If the carousel rotates through an angle  $\theta$ , a horse rotates through an arc length  $\Delta s$  in the interval  $\Delta t$ . To find the tangential speed, start with the equation for angular displacement:

$$\Delta \theta = \frac{\Delta s}{r}$$

Next, divide both sides of the equation by the time it takes to travel  $\Delta s$ :

$$\frac{\Delta\theta}{\Delta t} = \frac{\Delta s}{r\Delta t}$$

The left side of the equation equals  $\omega_{avg}$ . Also,  $\Delta s$  is a linear distance, so  $\Delta s$  divided by  $\Delta t$  is a linear speed along an arc length. If  $\Delta t$  is very short, then  $\Delta s$  is so small that it is nearly tangent to the circle; therefore,  $\Delta s/\Delta t$  is the tangential speed,  $v_{\star}$ 

**Tangential Speed** 

$$v_{\star} = r\omega$$

tangential speed = distance from axis  $\times$  angular speed

Tangential Speed Horses on a carousel move at the same angular speed but different tangential speeds.


Here,  $\omega$  is the instantaneous angular speed, rather than the average angular speed, because the time interval is so short. This equation is valid only when  $\omega$  is measured in radians per unit of time. Other measures of angular speed must not be used in this equation.

#### **Tangential Acceleration**

If a carousel speeds up, the horses experience an angular acceleration. The linear acceleration related to this angular acceleration is tangent to the circular path and is called the **tangential acceleration**. If an object rotating about a fixed axis changes its angular speed by  $\Delta\omega$  in the interval  $\Delta t$ , the tangential speed of a point on the object has changed by the amount  $\Delta v_t$ . Dividing the equation for tangential speed by  $\Delta t$  results in

$$\Delta v_t = r \Delta \omega$$

$$\frac{\Delta v_t}{\Delta t} = r \frac{\Delta \omega}{\Delta t}$$

If the time interval  $\Delta t$  is very small, then the left side of this relationship gives the tangential acceleration of the point. The angular speed divided by the time interval on the right side is the angular acceleration. Thus, the tangential acceleration  $(a_i)$  of a point on a rotating object is given by the following relationship:

#### **Tangential Acceleration**

 $a_t = r\alpha$ 

tangential acceleration = distance from axis  $\times$  angular acceleration

The angular acceleration in this equation refers to the instantaneous angular acceleration. This equation must use the unit radians to be valid. In SI, angular acceleration is expressed as radians per second per second.

#### **Finding Total Acceleration**

Any object moving in a circle has a centripetal acceleration. When both components of acceleration exist simultaneously, the tangential acceleration is tangent to the circular path and the centripetal acceleration points toward the center of the circular path. Because these components of acceleration are perpendicular to each other, the magnitude of the *total acceleration* can be found using the Pythagorean theorem, as follows:

$$a_{total} = \sqrt{a_t^2 + a_c^2}$$

The direction of the total acceleration, as shown in Figure 2, depends on the magnitude of each component of acceleration and can be found using the inverse of the tangent function. Note that when there is a tangential acceleration, the tangential speed is changing, and thus this situation is not an example of uniform circular motion.

Circular Motion and Gravitation

253

#### **Classroom Practice**

#### **TANGENTIAL SPEED**

A golfer has a maximum angular speed of 6.3 rad/s for her swing. She can choose between two drivers, one placing the club head 1.9 m from her axis of rotation and the other placing it 1.7 m from the axis.

- **a.** Find the tangential speed of the club head for each driver.
- **b.** All other factors being equal, which driver is likely to hit the ball farther?

#### **Answers**

- **a.** 12 m/s, 11 m/s
- **b.** The longer driver will hit the ball farther because its club head has a higher tangential speed.

#### **TANGENTIAL ACCELERATION**

A yo-yo has a tangential acceleration of 0.98 m/s² when it is released. The string is wound around a central shaft of radius 0.35 cm. What is the angular acceleration of the yo-yo?

**Answer**:  $2.8 \times 10^2 \text{ rad/s}^2$ 


> **[Teaching Tip]**
>
> To simulate the large accelerations involved in spaceflight, *Mercury* astronauts rode in the U. S. Navy's centrifuge in Johnsville, Pennsylvania. The astronauts sat in a gondola at the end of a 15.2 m arm that spun around a central axis. During the spin, the astronauts experienced a combination of centripetal and tangential accelerations of the gondola that ranged from 8 to 10 times the acceleration due to gravity.
>
> Point out that objects rotate around their center of mass *in the absence of other forces*. For example, a ruler thrown through the air will rotate around its own center of mass because air resistance is evenly distributed and produces zero net torque. However, a ruler with an index card taped to one end will not rotate around its own center of mass when it is thrown through the air because the card provides air resistance, which in turn produces a torque.
>
> **[Teaching Tip]**
>
> Let students examine objects that have a center of mass outside the object itself, such as a doughnut, a coat hanger, or a boomerang.
>

# Rotation and Inertia

In this feature, you will explore the concept of rotational inertia.

#### Center of Mass

You have learned that torque measures the ability of a force to rotate an object around some axis, such as a cat-flap door rotating on a hinge. Locating the axis of rotation for a cat-flap door is simple: It rotates on its hinges because the house applies a force that keeps the hinges in place.

Now imagine you are playing fetch with your dog, and you throw a stick up into the air for the dog to retrieve. Unlike the cat-flap door, the stick is not attached to anything. There is a special point around which the stick rotates if gravity is the only force acting on the stick. This point is called the stick's center of mass.

The center of mass is also the point at which all the mass of the body can be considered to be concentrated (for translational motion). This means that the complete motion of the stick is a combination of both translational and rotational motion. The stick rotates in the air around its

> center of mass. The center of mass, in turn, moves as if the stick were a point mass, with all of its mass concentrated at that point for purposes of analyzing its translational motion. For example, the hammer in Figure 1 rotates about its center of mass as it moves through the air. As the rest of the hammer spins, the center of mass moves along the parabolic path of a projectile.

For regularly shaped objects, such as a sphere or a cube, the center of mass is at the geometric center of the object. For more complicated objects, finding the center of mass is more difficult. Although the center of mass is the position at which an extended object's mass can be treated as a point mass, the *center of gravity* is the position at which the gravitational force acts on the extended object as if it were a point mass. For many situations, the center of mass and the center of gravity are equivalent.

Center of Mass The point around which this hammer rotates is the hammer's center of mass. The center of mass traces out the parabola that is characteristic of projectile motion.


#### **Moment of Inertia**

You may have noticed that it is easier to rotate a baseball bat around some axes than others. The resistance of an object to changes in rotational motion is measured by a quantity called the **moment of interia**.

The moment of inertia, which is abbreviated as *I*, is similar to mass because they are both forms of inertia. However, there is an important difference between them. Mass is an intrinsic property of an object, and the moment of inertia is not. The moment of inertia depends on the object's mass and the distribution of that mass around the axis of rotation. The farther the mass of an object is, on average, from the axis of rotation, the greater is the object's moment of inertia and the more difficult it is to rotate the object.

According to Newton's second law, when a net force acts on an object, the resulting acceleration of the object depends on the object's mass. Similarly, when a net torque acts on an object, the resulting change in the rotational motion of the object depends on the object's moment of inertia. (This law is covered in more detail in the feature "Rotational Dynamics.")

Some simple formulas for calculating the moment of inertia of common shapes are shown in Figure 2. The units for moment of inertia are  $kg\bullet m^2$ . To get an idea of the size of this unit, note that bowling balls typically have moments of inertia about an axis through their centers ranging from about  $0.7\,kg\bullet m^2$  to  $1.8\,kg\bullet m^2$ , depending on the mass and size of the ball.


> **[Did You Know?]**
>
> A baseball bat can be modeled as a rotating thin rod. When a bat is held at its end, its length is greatest with respect to the rotation axis, so its moment of inertia is greatest. Thus, the bat is easier to swing if you hold the bat closer to the center. Baseball players sometimes do this either because a bat is too heavy (large M) or too long (large  $\ell$ ).
>

#### FIGURE 2

| THE MOMENT OF INERTIA FOR VARIOUS RIGID OBJECTS OF MASS M |                   |                                                  |                       |  |  |  |
|-----------------------------------------------------------|-------------------|--------------------------------------------------|-----------------------|--|--|--|
| Shape                                                     | Moment of inertia | Shape                                            | Moment of inertia     |  |  |  |
| thin hoop about symmetry axis                             | $MR^2$            | thin rod about perpendicular axis through center | $\frac{1}{12}M\ell^2$ |  |  |  |
| thin hoop about diameter                                  | $\frac{1}{2}MR^2$ | thin rod about perpendicular axis through end    | $\frac{1}{3}M\ell^2$  |  |  |  |
| point mass about axis                                     | $MR^2$            | solid sphere about diameter                      | $\frac{2}{5}MR^2$     |  |  |  |
| disk or cylinder about symmetry axis                      | $\frac{1}{2}MR^2$ | thin spherical shell about diameter              | $\frac{2}{3}MR^2$     |  |  |  |

Circular Motion and Gravitation

255


> **[Demonstration]**
>

#### **MOMENT OF INERTIA OF A ROD**

**Purpose** Give visual examples of the two cases of a thin rod and the case of a cylinder described in **Figure 2**.

Materials broomstick or dowel

**Procedure** If possible, let student volunteers assist by trying the various demonstrations.

Thin rod about perpendicular axis through center: Hold the rod in the center with one hand. Rotate the rod back and forth through half rotations at regular time intervals. Note the force required to change the motion.

Thin rod about perpendicular axis through end: Hold rod at one end. Rotate the rod through half circles in the same time interval as previously used. Note the increased force required (corresponding to the larger moment of inertia).

Cylinder: Hold the rod vertically between your palms with your fingers extended. Rotate the cylinder by moving your palms back and forth in the same regular time interval as used previously. Note the much smaller force required in this case.

### **Take i t Furt her**


> **[Misconception Alert]**
>
> Students will likely confuse zero net torque with zero rotation. State explicitly that an object rotating at constant speed is experiencing zero net torque. This situation is analogous to linear motion: an object moving at a constant velocity has zero net force acting on it.
>

### **The Language of Physics**

Another way to state the second equilibrium condition is to say that the sum of the clockwise torques must equal the sum of the counterclockwise torques.


> **[Teaching Tip]**
>
> Students may be confused about which axis of rotation to choose when applying the second condition for equilibrium to an object. Tell students that any axis can be used; the resultant torque acting on an object in rotational equilibrium is independent of where the axis is placed. This fact is useful in solving rotational equilibrium problems because an unknown force that acts along a line passing through this axis of rotation will not produce any torque. Beginning a diagram by arbitrarily setting an axis where a force acts can eliminate an unknown in the problem.
>
> **TAKE IT FURTHER**
>

# Rotational Dynamics

The feature "Angular Kinematics" developed the kinematic equations for rotational motion. Similarly, the feature "Rotation and Inertia" applied the concept of inertia to rotational motion. In this feature, you will see how torque relates to rotational equilibrium and angular acceleration. You will also learn how momentum and kinetic energy are described in rotational motion.

#### FIGURE 1

#### Equal and Opposite Forces

The two forces exerted on this table are equal and opposite, yet the table moves. How is this possible?

#### Rotational Equilibrium

If you and a friend push on opposite sides of a table, as shown in Figure 1, the two forces acting on the table are equal in magnitude and opposite in direction. You might think that the table won't move because the two forces balance each other. But it does; it rotates in place.

The piece of furniture can move even though the net force acting on it is zero because the net torque acting on it is not zero. If the net force on an object is zero, the object is in *translational equilibrium*. If the net torque on an object is zero, the object is in *rotational equilibrium*. For an object to be completely in equilibrium, both rotational and translational, there must be both zero net force and zero net torque. The dependence of equilibrium on the absence of net torque is called the *second condition for equilibrium*.

#### Newton's Second Law for Rotation

Just as net force is related to translational acceleration according to Newton's second law, there is a relationship between the net torque on an object and the angular acceleration given to the object. Specifically, the net torque on an object is equal to the moment of inertia times the angular acceleration. This relationship is parallel to Newton's second law of motion and is known as Newton's second law for rotating objects. This law is expressed mathematically as follows:

Newton's Second Law for Rotating Objects

$$\tau_{net} = I\alpha$$

**net torque** = **moment of inertia** × **angular acceleration**

This equation shows that a net positive torque corresponds to a positive angular acceleration, and a net negative torque corresponds to a negative angular acceleration. Thus, it is important to keep track of the signs of the torques acting on the object when using this equation to calculate an object's angular acceleration.


#### **Angular Momentum**

$$L = I\omega$$

 $angular momentum = moment of inertia \times angular speed$ 

The unit of angular momentum is kg•m²/s. When the net external torque acting on an object or objects is zero, the angular momentum of the object(s) does not change. This is the law of conservation of angular momentum. For example, assuming the friction between the skates and the ice is negligible, there is no torque acting on the skater in Figure 2, so his angular momentum is conserved. When he brings his hands and feet rotation. As a result, the moment of inertia of his body decreases. Because

#### **Angular Kinetic Energy**

Rotating objects possess kinetic energy associated with their angular speed. This is called rotational kinetic energy and is expressed by the following equation:

#### **Rotational Kinetic Energy**

$$KE_{rot} = \frac{1}{2}I\omega^2$$

rotational kinetic energy =  $\frac{1}{2}$  × moment of inertia × (angular speed)<sup>2</sup>

As shown in Figure 3, rotational kinetic energy is analogous to the translational kinetic energy of a particle, given by the expression  $\frac{1}{2}mv^2$ . The unit of rotational kinetic energy is the joule, the SI unit for energy.

#### **Conserving Angular Momentum**

When this skater brings his hands and feet closer to his body, his moment of inertia decreases, and his angular speed increases to keep total angular momentum constant

closer to his body, more of his mass, on average, is nearer to his axis of his angular momentum is constant, his angular speed increases to compensate for his smaller moment of inertia.

#### FIGURE 3

| COMPARING TRANSLATIONAL AND ROTATIONAL MOTION |                        |                             |  |  |  |
|-----------------------------------------------|------------------------|-----------------------------|--|--|--|
|                                               | Translational motion   | Rotational motion           |  |  |  |
| Equilibrium                                   | $\sum F = 0$           | $\sum \tau = 0$             |  |  |  |
| Newton's second law                           | $\sum F = ma$          | $\sum \tau = I\alpha$       |  |  |  |
| Momentum                                      | p = mv                 | $L = I\omega$               |  |  |  |
| Kinetic energy                                | $KE = \frac{1}{2}mv^2$ | $KE = \frac{1}{2}I\omega^2$ |  |  |  |

Circular Motion and Gravitation

257


> **[Demonstration]**
>

#### **COLLIDING MAGNETIC MARBLES**

Purpose Illustrate conservation of angular momentum and show that objects moving linearly can also have angular momentum.

Materials 2 magnetic marbles, overhead projector

**Procedure** Place one magnetic marble in the center of the overhead projector. Send the second magnetic marble toward the first to cause a glancing collision. The marbles will stick together and spin about their center of mass. Point out to students that the linear momentum is not converted to angular momentum. Repeat the demonstration and have students observe the slight translation of the two marbles after the collision. This is the linear momentum. which is lost due to friction. The spinning is due to conservation of the angular momentum of the moving marble relative to the stationary marble.

### PHYSICS ON THE EDGE


> **[Teaching Tip]**
>
> Encourage students who are interested in this feature to read portions of Einstein's popular account of the theories of special and general relativity, titled Relativity: The Special and the General Theory. In the first few chapters of Part II of his book, Einstein discusses the equivalence between gravitational and inertial mass and introduces the thought experiment described in this feature.
>

### **PHYSICS ON THE EDGE**

# **General Relativity**

Special relativity applies only to nonaccelerating reference frames. Einstein expanded his special theory of relativity into the general theory to cover all cases, including accelerating reference frames.

#### **Gravitational Attraction and Accelerating Reference Frames**

Einstein began with a simple question: "If we pick up a stone and then let it go, why does it fall to the ground?" You might answer that it falls because it is attracted by gravitational force. As usual, Einstein was not satisfied with this typical answer. He was also intrigued by the fact that in a vacuum, all objects in free fall have the same acceleration, regardless of their mass. As you learned in the chapter on gravity, the reason is that gravitational mass is equal to inertial mass. Because the two masses are equivalent, the extra gravitational force from a larger gravitational mass is exactly canceled out by its larger inertial mass, thus producing the same acceleration. Einstein considered this equivalence to be a great puzzle.

To explore these questions, Einstein used a thought experiment similar to the one shown in Figure 1. In Figure 1(a), a person in an elevator at rest on Earth's surface drops a ball. The ball is in free fall and accelerates downward, as you would expect. In Figure 1(b), a similar elevator in space is moving upward with a constant acceleration. If an astronaut in this elevator releases a ball, the floor accelerates up toward the ball. To the astronaut, the ball appears to be accelerating downward, and this situation is identical to the situation described in (a). In other words, the astronaut may think that his spaceship is on Earth and that the ball falls because of gravitational attraction. Because gravitational mass equals inertial mass, the astronaut cannot conduct any experiments to distinguish between the two cases. Einstein described this realization as "the happiest thought of my life."


#### Gravity and Light

Now, imagine a ray of light crossing the accelerating elevator. Suppose that the ray of light enters the elevator from the left side. As the light ray travels across the elevator from left to right, the floor of the elevator accelerates upward. Thus, to an astronaut in the elevator, the light ray would appear to follow a parabolic path.

If Einstein's theory of the equivalence between gravitational fields and accelerating reference frames is correct, then light must also bend this way in a gravitational field. Einstein proposed using the sun's gravitational field to test this idea. The effect is small and difficult to measure, but Einstein predicted that it could be done during a solar eclipse. Einstein published the theory of general relativity in 1916. Just three years later, in 1919, the British astronomer Arthur S. Eddington conducted observations of the light from stars during an eclipse. This experiment provided support for Einstein's theory of general relativity.

#### Curved Space-Time

Although light traveling near a massive object such as the sun appears to bend, is it possible that the light is actually following the straightest path? Einstein theorized that the answer to this question is yes. In general relativity, the three dimensions of space and the one dimension of time are considered together as four-dimensional space-time. When no masses are present, an object moves through "flat" space-time. Einstein proposed that masses change the shape of space-time, as shown in Figure 2. A light ray that bends near the sun is following the new shape of the distorted space-time.

For example, imagine rolling a tennis ball across a water bed. If the water bed is flat, the tennis ball will roll straight across. If you place a heavy bowling ball in the center, the bowling ball changes the shape of the water bed. As a result, the tennis ball will then follow a curved path, which, in Newton's theory, is due to the gravitational force between the two. In general relativity, the tennis ball is simply following the curved path of space-time, which is distorted by the bowling ball. Unlike Newton's *mathematical* theory of gravitation, Einstein's theory of curved space-time offers a *physical* explanation for gravitational force.

Today, Einstein's theory of general relativity is well accepted. However, scientists have not yet been able to incorporate it with another wellaccepted theory that describes things at the microscopic level: quantum mechanics. Many scientists are now working toward a unification of these two theories.


