---
course_chapter: 1
chapter_title: Introduction to Science
section: 1
section_title: The Nature of Science
---

# CHAPTER

# Introduction to Science

### **Chapter Outline**

### **1** The Nature of Science

**How Science Takes Place** The Branches of Science Scientific Laws and Theories

### **10** The Way Science Works

Science Skills Units of Measurement

### **Organizing Data**

**Presenting Scientific Data** Writing Numbers in Scientific Notation

**Using Significant Figures** 

These reading tools can help you learn the material in this chapter. For more information on how to use these and other tools, see **Appendix A.** 

### **Science Terms**

**Everyday Words Used in Science** All of the key terms that you will learn in this book are used by scientists. Many words used in science are also words used in everyday speech. You should pay attention to the definitions of such words so that you use them correctly in scientific contexts.

**Your Turn** As you read the chapter, make a table like the one below for the terms *scientific law*, *scientific theory*, and *scientific notation*. Include the everyday meaning of the word that comes after the word *scientific*.

| TERM                 | SCIENTIFIC CONTEXT                                                                           | EVERYDAY<br>MEANING                   |
|----------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------|
| scientific<br>method | a series of steps<br>used to solve<br>problems or answer<br>questions in a<br>scientific way | method—a<br>way of doing<br>something |

### Classification

**Branches of Science** Classification is a logical tool for organizing ideas. Classification involves grouping things into categories. The example below shows that you do a lot of classifying without even realizing it.

**Your Turn** Figure 3 in Section 1 shows how branches of science can be classified. Write down the definitions of the branches of science included in the figure. Explain why astronomy, geology, and meteorology are classified as types of Earth science, and explain why physics and chemistry are classified as types of physical science.

# **Graphic Organizers**

**Spider Maps** Graphic Organizers are drawings that you can make to help you organize the concepts that you learn. A spider map is a Graphic Organizer that shows how details are organized into categories that relate to a main idea.

**Your Turn** As you read Section 2, complete a spider map like the one started here to organize the ideas that you learn about SI units. You may also create more spider maps to organize the science skills that you learn in this chapter.

# The Nature of Science

### Key Ideas

- > How do scientists explore the world?
- How are the many types of science organized?
- What are scientific theories, and how are they different from scientific laws?

### **Key Terms**

science technology law theory

### Why It **Matters**

Science is applied to the technologies that are used to build many important things, such as bridges and vehicles.

When you have a question about how something works, how do you find the answer? Generally, scientists describe the universe by using basic rules, which can be discovered by careful, methodical study.

### **How Science Takes Place**

A scientist may perform experiments to find a new aspect of the natural world, to explain a known phenomenon, to check the results of other experiments, or to test the predictions of current theories.

Imagine that it is 1895 and you are experimenting with mysterious rays known as cathode rays. These rays were discovered almost 40 years earlier, but in 1895 no one knows that they are composed of electrons. To produce the rays, you pump the air out of a sealed glass tube, which creates a vacuum. An early version of this type of tube is shown in **Figure 1.** You then connect rods inside the tube to an electrical source. Electric charges flow through the empty space between the rods and produce the rays.

Figure 1 An early cathode-ray tube is shown on the left. A television picture tube, on the right, is a form of the same cathode-ray tube.

Cathode-ray tube

### **Academic Vocabulary**

conduct (kuhn DUHKT) to do

### Integrating **Biology**

Penicillin In 1928, the Scottish scientist Alexander Fleming was investigating disease-causing bacteria. He saw that one of his cultures contained an area where no bacteria were growing. An unknown organism was growing in that area. Rather than discard the culture as a failure, Fleming investigated the unfamiliar organism and found that it was a type of mold. This mold produced a substance that prevented the growth of many disease-causing bacteria. What he found by questioning the results of a "failed" experiment became the first modern antibiotic, penicillin. Major discoveries are often made by accident when scientists are trying to find something else.

### READING TOOLBOX

### **Spider Map**

Create a spider map that explains the steps that happen when science takes place. Use the blue heads in the section as the branches of your map.

### Scientists answer questions by investigating.

As a scientist, you have learned from the work of other scientists and have <u>conducted</u> your own experiments. You know that when certain minerals are placed inside the tube, the cathode rays make them glow. Cardboard pieces coated with powder made from these minerals are used to detect the rays. If a very high voltage is used, even the glass tube glows.

Other scientists have found that cathode rays can pass through thin metal foil, but the rays travel in our atmosphere for only 2 or 3 cm. You wonder if the rays could pass through the glass tube. Other experiments have shown that cathode rays do not go through glass. You think that scientists may not have been able to see the weak glow from the mineral-coated cardboard because the glass tube glowed too brightly. So, you decide to cover the glass tube with heavy black paper.

### Scientists plan experiments.

Before experimenting, you write your plan in a laboratory notebook and sketch the equipment that you are using. You make a table in which you can record your observations and your variables—the electric voltage used, the distance from the tube to the cathode-ray detector, and the air temperature. You state the idea that you are going to test: At a high voltage, cathode rays will be strong enough to be detected outside the tube by causing the mineral-coated cardboard to glow.

### Scientists observe.

You are ready to start your experiment but want to be sure that the black-paper cover does not have any gaps. So, you darken the room and turn on the tube. The cover blocks all of the light from the tube. Just before you switch off the tube, you glimpse a light nearby. When you turn on the tube again, the light reappears.

You realize that this light is coming from the mineralcoated cardboard that you planned to use to detect cathode rays. The detector is already glowing even though it is almost 1 m away from the tube. You know that cathode rays cannot travel 1 m in air. You suspect that the tube is giving off a new type of ray that no one has seen before. What do you do now?

Wilhelm Roentgen (RENT guhn) pondered this question in Würzburg, Germany, on November 8, 1895, when he did this experiment. Should he call the experiment a failure because the results were unexpected? Should he report his findings in a scientific journal or ask reporters to cover this news story? Maybe he should send letters about his discovery to famous scientists and invite them to come see his experiment.

### Scientists always confirm results.

Because Roentgen was a scientist, he first repeated his experiment to be sure of his observations. His results caused him to think of new questions and to do more experiments to find the answers to these questions.

He found that the rays passed through almost everything, but dense materials absorbed some of the rays. When he held his hand in the path of the rays, the bones were visible as shadows on the detector, as **Figure 2** shows. When Roentgen published his findings in December, he still did not know what the rays were. He called them *X rays* because *x* represents an unknown in a mathematical equation.

Within three months of Roentgen's discovery, a doctor in Massachusetts used X rays to help set the broken bones in a boy's arm. After a year, more than a thousand scientific papers about X rays had been published. In 1901, Roentgen received the first Nobel Prize in physics for his discovery.

Reading Check How did Roentgen confirm his observation? (See Appendix E for answers to Reading Checks.)

### The Branches of Science

Roentgen's work with X rays shows how scientists work, but what is science about? **Science** is observing, studying, and experimenting to find the nature of things. You can think of science as having two main branches: social science, which deals with individual and group human behavior, and natural science. Natural science tries to understand how "nature," or "the whole universe," behaves. **> Most of the time, natural science is divided into biological science, physical science, and Earth science. Figure 3** shows how science is divided.

**Figure 2** Roentgen included this X ray of his wife's hand in one of the first papers that he wrote about X rays.

science (SIE uhns) the knowledge obtained by observing natural events and conditions in order to discover facts and formulate laws or principles that can be verified or tested

The branches of science work together. The classification of science seems to be very simple. For example, life science is biology. Biology has many branches, such as botany, the science of plants, and ecology, the science of balance in nature. Medicine and agriculture are also branches of biology. Physical science has two main branches—chemistry and physics. Chemistry is the science of matter and its changes. Physics is the science of forces and energy. Both depend greatly on mathematics. Two branches of Earth science are *geology*, the science of the physical nature and history of Earth, and meteorology, the science of the atmosphere and weather. But the branches of science have become more mixed. For example, some chemists study chemicals that make up living things, such as the DNA shown in Figure 4. This branch of science is biochemistry, the study of the matter of living things. It is both a life science and a physical science. Other branches of science are also mixed. For example, geophysics—the study of the forces that affect Earth, is both an Earth science and a physical science. Science and technology work together. Scientists who do experiments to learn more about the Figure 4 This model shows the structure of DNA (deoxyribonucleic world are doing *pure science*. **Technology** is the application acid), which makes each of us unique. of science for practical uses. Engineers apply scientific knowledge and methods to design products people use. Advances in science and technology depend on one another. The first computers, such as the one shown in Figure 5, often filled up a whole room. But advances in science have led to smaller computers that are both faster and cheaper. Modern computers also help scientists. For example, computers help scientists make complex calculations quickly. Figure 5 Advances in science have greatly reduced the size of and increased the availability of computers. What devices that use computer technology do you use?

### Models can represent physical events.

chemical reactions.

Why It **Matters** 

When you see the word *model*, you may think of a small copy of an airplane or a person who shows off clothing.

Scientists use models, too. A scientific model is a representa-

tion of an object or event that can be studied to understand the real object or event. Sometimes, models represent things that are too small, too big, or too complex to study easily.

A model of a water molecule is shown in Figure 8.

Chemists use models to study how water molecules form ice crystals, such as snowflakes. Models can be drawings on paper. Real objects can also be used as models to help us picture things that we cannot see. For example, a spring can be used as a model of a sound wave. A model can also be a mental "picture" or a set of rules that describes how something works. After you have studied atoms, you will be able to picture atoms in your mind. You can use these pictures to figure out what will happen in

Reading Check What are three types of models?

Millennium Bridge

various conditions. This type of modeling is an essential part of designing massive structures such as the Millennium Bridge in London.

Computer models are important tools for scientists and engineers. Computers process long, complicated calculations to predict how the system being modeled will behave under

Figure 8 Models can be used to describe a water molecule (top right) and to study how water

molecules are arranged in a

YOUR ONLINE RESEARCH

1. Research how computer

the Millennium Bridge.

models were used by the

engineers who worked on

Engineers used computer

models to predict the strength

and stability of the Millennium

Bridge. The 320 m bridge was

built so that people could walk over a river in London, England.

snowflake.

|    | Why It Matters  Leonard                                                                                                                                                                                               | o da Vinci                                                                                                                                                          | HISTORY<br>IN SCIENCE                                                                                                                                                                                                                        |
|----|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
|    | However, technology is also nee<br>Sometimes, great thinkers use the<br>new things that are "ahead of the<br>such a thinker. He designed mar<br>the modern-day helicopter. But it<br>the technology available to make | knowledge to develop technology.                                                                                                                                    |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |
|    | enough lift to get it off the ground                                                                                                                                                                                  | In 1480, Leonardo da Vinci<br>used his knowledge of physics                                                                                                         | Leonardo da Vinci was a master artist, a creative inventor, and an engineer.                                                                                                                                                                 |
|    |                                                                                                                                                                                                                       | to create a design for a helical air screw. He thought that if the screw turned fast enough, the air would be compressed enough to lift the machine off the ground. | Modern helicopters use rotating propeller blades and powerful engines to obtain vertical lift. Because helicopters can take off vertically, they can be used for remote rescue operations.                                                   |
|    |                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |                                                                                                                                                                     | RAF                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
| Ī. | AUL SCUE                                                                                                                                                                                                              |                                                                                                                                                                     | RESCUE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |
|    | NZ582 O REJU                                                                                                                                                                                                          | SCINKS. www.scilinks.org Topic: Leonardo da Vinci Code: HK80869                                                                                                     | UNDERSTANDING CONCEPTS  1. Explain how technology depends on science.  WRITING IN SCIENCE  2. Research another invention by Leonardo da Vinci. Write a short report explaining how science and technology were important for this invention. |
|    |                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |                                                                                                                                                                     | 13                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |

