---
course_chapter: 1
chapter_title: Introduction to Science
section: 2
section_title: The Way Science Works
---

# The Way Science Works

Figure 9 Quantitative Measurements

|        | SI unit                       | Other units                                                         | Examples                                                                                                                                             |
|--------|-------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Time   | second (s)                    | millisecond (ms)<br>minute (min)<br>hour (h)                        | Stopwatches measure time precisely.                                                                                                                  |
| Length | meter (m)                     | millimeter (mm)<br>centimeter (cm)<br>kilometer (km)                | Many diving boards are as long as 4.9 m.                                                                                                             |
| Mass   | kilogram (kg)                 | milligram (mg)<br>gram (g)                                          | A CD in its case has a mass of about 100 g.  Mass can be measured by using a triple-beam balance.                                                    |
| Volume | cubic meter (m <sup>3</sup> ) | cubic centimeter (cm <sup>3</sup> )<br>milliliter (mL)<br>liter (L) | A liquid's volume can be measured by using a graduated cylinder.  You can find the volume of a dresser by multiplying the length, width, and height. |

### Measurements quantify your observations.

Many observations rely on quantitative measurements. Basic scientific measurements usually answer questions such as "How much time did it take?" and "How big is it?"

Often, you will measure time, **length, mass,** and **volume.** The SI units for these quantities, examples of each quantity, and some of the tools that you may use to measure them are shown in **Figure 9.** 

Although someone may say that he or she is "weighing" an object with a balance, **weight** is not the same as mass. Mass is the quantity of matter, and weight is the force with which Earth's gravity pulls on that quantity of matter. Your weight would be less on Mars than it is on Earth, but your mass would be the same on both planets.

In the lab, you will use a graduated cylinder to measure the volume of liquids. The volume of a solid that has a specific geometric shape can be calculated from the measured lengths of its surfaces. Small volumes are usually expressed in cubic centimeters  $(cm^3)$ . One cubic centimeter is equal to one milliliter (mL).

Scientific instruments can measure quantities that are very small. You cannot see the tiny guitar shown in **Figure 10** with the unaided eye. But by using an electron microscope, the width of the strings on the tiny guitar can be measured. At only about 50 nanometers (nm) wide, these strings are more than 1,000 times as thin as one of your hairs.

**Figure 10** This tiny guitar is made of silicon and is only about 10 micrometers long.

**length** (LENGKTH) a measure of the straight-line distance between two points **mass** (MAS) a measure of the amount of matter in an object

**volume** (VAHL yoom) a measure of the size of a body or region in three-dimensional space

weight (WAYT) a measure of the gravitational force exerted on an object

### Section 2 Review

### **KEY IDEAS**

- **1. Describe** a hypothesis and how it is used. Give an example of a hypothesis.
- Explain why you should not call any experiment a failure.
- **3. Explain** the difference between SI base units and SI derived units. Give an example of each.
- List three examples each of objects that are commonly measured by mass, by volume, and by length.

### **CRITICAL THINKING**

- Applying Concepts Explain why scientific methods are said to involve critical thinking.
- 6. Summarizing Information Why do you think that it is a good idea to limit an experiment to test only one variable at a time whenever possible?

- Understanding Relationships Using scientists' tools as an example, explain how science and technology depend on each other.
- 8. Drawing Conclusions An old riddle asks, "Which weighs more, a pound of feathers or a pound of lead?" Answer the question, and explain why you think that people sometimes answer incorrectly.

### Math Skills

- 9. Convert the following measurements to grams.
  - a. 50 kilograms
  - **b.** 4,630 micrograms
- 10. Convert 0.42 kilometers to meters.

