---
course_chapter: 1
chapter_title: Introduction to Science
section: 3
section_title: Organizing Data
---

# **Organizing Data**

### Key Ideas

- > Why is organizing data an important science skill?
- How do scientists handle very large and very small numbers?
- How can you tell the precision of a measurement?

### Key **Terms**

scientific notation precision significant figure accuracy

### Why It Matters

Measurements must be reported correctly when building structures such as the Gateway Arch in St. Louis, Missouri.

Being able to read about the experiments that other scientists had performed with the cathode-ray tube helped Roentgen discover X rays. He was able to learn from the data.

### **Presenting Scientific Data**

Suppose that you are trying to determine the speed of a chemical reaction that produces a gas. You could let the gas push water out of a graduated cylinder, as **Figure 1** shows. You read the volume of gas in the cylinder every 20 s from the start of the reaction until there is no change in volume for three readings. You make a table to organize the data that you collect in the experiment. **>** Because scientists use written reports and oral presentations to share their results, organizing and presenting data are important science skills.

Because you did the experiment, you saw how the volume changed over time. But how can someone who reads your report see how the volume changed? To show the results, you can make a graph.

**Experimental Data** 

| Time (s) | Volume of<br>gas (mL) |
|----------|-----------------------|
| 0        | 0                     |
| 20       | 6                     |
| 40       | 25                    |
| 60       | 58                    |
| 80       | 100                   |
| 100      | 140                   |
| 120      | 152                   |
| 140      | 156                   |
| 160      | 156                   |
| 180      | 156                   |

Figure 1 You can find the volume of gas that a chemical reaction produces by measuring the volume of water that a gas displaces in a graduated cylinder.

### Line graphs show continuous changes.

There are many types of graphs that you could use, but which one best shows how the volume changed over time? A *line graph* is a good choice for displaying data that change continuously. Our example experiment has two variables, time and volume. Time is the *independent variable*—you chose the time intervals to take the measurements. The volume of gas is the *dependent variable*—its value depends on what happens in the experiment.

When you make line graphs, you should put the independent variable on the *x*-axis and the dependent variable on the *y*-axis. **Figure 2** is a graph of the data that is in the table in **Figure 1**.

Line graphs clearly show how the data changed during an experiment. A person who has not seen your experiment can look at this graph and know how much the volume of gas increased over time. The graph shows that gas was produced slowly for the first 20 s. From 40 s to 100 s, the rate increased until it became constant. The reaction then slowed down and stopped after about 140 s.

Reading Check When should you use a line graph?

### Bar graphs compare the values of items.

A *bar graph* is useful when you want to compare similar data for several individual items or events. If you measured the melting temperatures of some metals, your data could be presented in a table. **Figure 3** shows the melting temperatures of five metals presented in a table and as a bar graph. The bar graph clearly shows how large or small the differences in individual values are. A bar graph is a better choice than a line graph for showing single values for many items.

Figure 2 Data that change are best represented by a line graph. Notice that many in-between volumes can be estimated.

**Figure 3** Data that have specific values for various items or events should be represented by a bar graph.

### **Melting Points of Some Common Metals**

| Element  | Melting<br>temperature (K) |
|----------|----------------------------|
| Aluminum | 933                        |
| Gold     | 1,337                      |
| Iron     | 1,808                      |
| Lead     | 601                        |
| Silver   | 1,235                      |

### **Composition of a Winter Jacket**

Figure 4 A pie graph is best for data that represent parts of a whole. This pie graph shows the composition of a winter jacket and gives the percentage of each type of fabric in a jacket. If you add the percentages of each material, what is the total?

**scientific notation** (SIE uhn TIF ik noh TAY shuhn) a method of expressing a quantity as a number multiplied by 10 to the appropriate power

### Pie graphs show the parts of a whole.

A *pie graph* is ideal for displaying data that are parts of a whole. Winter jackets, such as the one shown in **Figure 4**, are made of various fabrics that help keep you warm and dry. A jacket may contain 66% nylon, 30% polyester, and 4% spandex. As **Figure 4** shows, you can draw a pie graph that shows these percentages as a portion of the whole pie. In this case, the pie represents the jacket. To construct a pie graph, refer to Graphing Skills in Appendix B.

### **Writing Numbers in Scientific Notation**

Sometimes, the value of a measurement is very large or very small. For example, the speed of light in space is about 300,000,000 m/s. Suppose that you wanted to calculate the time required for light to travel from Neptune to Earth when Earth and Neptune are 4,500,000,000,000 m apart. To calculate this time, you would divide the distance between Earth and Neptune by the speed of light, as shown in the equations below.

$$t = \frac{\text{distance from Earth to Neptune (m)}}{\text{speed of light (m/s)}}$$
$$t = \frac{4,500,000,000,000 \text{ m}}{300,000,000 \text{ m/s}}$$

There are a lot of zeros to keep track of when performing this calculation. To reduce the number of zeros in very big and very small numbers, you can express the values as simple numbers multiplied by a power of 10, a method called scientific notation. Some powers of 10 and their decimal equivalents are shown below.

$$\begin{array}{rcl} 10^3 & = & 1,000 \\ 10^2 & = & 100 \\ 10^1 & = & 10 \\ 10^0 & = & 1 \\ 10^{-1} & = & 0.1 \\ 10^{-2} & = & 0.01 \\ 10^{-3} & = & 0.001 \end{array}$$

In scientific notation, 4,500,000,000,000 m can be written as  $4.5 \times 10^{12}$  m. The speed of light in space is  $3.0 \times 10^8$  m/s. Refer to Math Skills in Appendix B for more information on scientific notation.

Reading Check When should you use scientific notation to express a quantity?

### Use scientific notation to make calculations.

When you use scientific notation in calculations, you should follow the math rules for powers of 10. For example, when you multiply two values, you add the powers of 10. When you divide two values, you subtract the powers of 10.

Using these rules can help you calculate more easily the time required for light to travel from Earth to Neptune.

$$t = \frac{4.5 \times 10^{12} \text{m}}{3.0 \times 10^8 \text{ m/s}}$$
$$t = \left(\frac{4.5}{3.0} \times \frac{10^{12}}{10^8}\right) \frac{\text{m}}{\text{m/s}}$$
$$t = (1.5 \times 10^{(12-8)}) \text{s}$$
$$t = 1.5 \times 10^4 \text{ s}$$

### READING TOOLBOX

### **Everyday Words Used in** Science

As you read this section, make a list of scientific words that you have heard before, such as precision. Then, compare the familiar meaning of the word with the scientific meaning.

### Math Skills Writing Scientific Notation

The adult human heart pumps about 18,000 L of blood each day. Write this value in scientific notation.

### Identify

List the given and unknown values.

### Given:

volume(V) = 18,000 LUnknown:

 $volume(V) = ? \times 10$ ? L

Write the form for scientific

### $V = ? \times 10^{?} L$

notation.

### Solve

First, find the largest power of 10 that will divide into the known value.

Then, write that number as a power of 10.

Insert the values that you obtained into the form.

Divide 18,000 L by 10,000. The result is 1.8, leaving one digit before the decimal point. So. 18,000 L can be written as  $(1.8 \times 10,000)$  L. Because  $10,000 = 10^4$ , you can write 18,000 L as  $1.8 \times 10^4$  L.  $V = 1.8 \times 10^4 \, \text{L}$ 

### **Practice**

- 1. Write the following measurements in scientific notation.
  - a. 800,000,000 m
- **b.** 0.0015 kg
- 2. Write the following measurements in long form.

**a.** 
$$4.5 \times 10^3$$
 g

**b.** 
$$1.99 \times 10^{-8}$$
 cm

For more practice, visit go.hrw.com and enter keyword HK8MP.

### Practice **Hint**

To use a shortcut for scientific notation, move the decimal point and count the number of places it is moved. To change 18,000 to 1.8, move the decimal point four places to the left. The number of places that the decimal is moved is the correct power of 10.

$$18,000 L = 1.8 \times 10^4 L$$

> When a quantity smaller than 1 is converted to scientific notation, the decimal moves to the right and the power of 10 is negative. To express 0.0000021 m in scientific notation, move the decimal point to the right.

$$0.0000021 \ m = 2.1 \times 10^{-6} \ m$$

### Math Skills Using Scientific Notation

Your county plans to buy a rectangular tract of land measuring  $5.36\times10^3$  m by  $1.38\times10^4$  m to establish a nature preserve. What is the area of this tract in square meters?

| Identify |  |
|----------|--|
|          |  |

List the given and unknown values.

Given:

length (l) =  $1.38 \times 10^4$  m width (w)=  $5.36 \times 10^3$  m

Unknown:

 $area(A) = ? m^2$ 

Plan

Write the equation for area.

 $A = l \times w$ 

Solve

Insert the known values into the equation, and solve.

 $A = (1.38 \times 10^4 \text{ m}) (5.36 \times 10^3 \text{ m})$ Regroup the values and units as follows.  $A = (1.38 \times 5.36) (10^4 \times 10^3) (\text{m} \times \text{m})$ When multiplying, add the powers of 10.  $A = (1.38 \times 5.36) (10^{4+3}) (\text{m} \times \text{m})$  $A = 7.3968 \times 10^7 \text{ m}^2$ Round the answer.  $A = 7.40 \times 10^7 \text{ m}^2$ 

### Practice **Hint**

▶ Because some scientific calculators and computer math software cannot display superscript numbers, they use E values to display numbers in scientific notation. A calculator may show the number  $3.12 \times 10^4$  as 3.12 E4. Very small numbers are shown with negative values. For example,  $2.637 \times 10^{-5}$  may be shown as 2.637 E−5. The letter E signifies exponential notation. The E value is the exponent (power) of 10. When writing this number on paper, be sure to use the form  $2.637 \times 10^{-5}$ .

### **Practice**

- 1. Perform the following calculations.
  - **a.**  $(5.5 \times 10^4 \text{ cm}) \times (1.4 \times 10^4 \text{ cm})$
  - **b.**  $(4.34 \text{ g/mL}) \times (8.22 \times 10^6 \text{ mL})$
  - c.  $(3.8 \times 10^{-2} \text{ cm}) \times (4.4 \times 10^{-2} \text{ cm}) \times (7.5 \times 10^{-2} \text{ cm})$
- 2. Perform the following calculations.
  - a.  $\frac{5.2 \times 10^8 \text{ cm}^3}{9.5 \times 10^2 \text{ cm}}$
- **b.**  $\frac{6.05 \times 10^7 \text{ g}}{8.8 \times 10^6 \text{ cm}^3}$

For more practice, visit go.hrw.com and enter keyword HK8MP.

### **Using Significant Figures**

The **precision**, or exactness, of measurements can vary. What would you use to measure the distances of two long jumps that are very close? If you use a tape measure that is marked every 0.1 m, you could report that both measurements were 4.1 m. But if you use a tape measure that is marked every 0.01 m, you could report more precise values—one jump was 4.11 m, and the other was 4.14 m.

**Scientists use significant figures to show the precision of a measured quantity.** The distance of 4.1 m has two significant figures because the measured value has two digits.

Accuracy differs from precision.

Precision and accuracy do not have the same meaning, as Figure 5 shows. If you measure the long jump with a tape measure that has a broken tip, you can still read 4.14 m precisely. But that number is not accurate because it is not the actual distance of the jump. A measured quantity is only as accurate and precise as the tool used to make the measurement. Significant figures tell you how precise a measurement is, but they do not tell you how accurate the measurement is.

### Round your answers to the correct significant figures.

When you use measurements in calculations, the answer is only as precise as the least precise measurement used in the calculation—the measurement with the fewest significant figures. For example, suppose that you are going to paint a mural on a wall. To figure out how much paint you will need for your project, you need to know the area of the wall. The measured dimensions are reported to be 8.871 m by 9.14 m.

If you use a calculator to multiply 8.871 by 9.14, the display may show 81.08094 as an answer. But you do not know the area of the room to the nearest 0.00001  $\mathrm{m}^2$ , as the calculator showed. To have the correct number of significant figures, you must round off your results. The answer should have the same number of significant figures as the least precise value in the calculation. In this case, the value of 9.14 had three significant figures, so the correct rounded result is  $A=81.1~\mathrm{m}^2$ .

When adding or subtracting, use this rule: The answer cannot have more decimal places than the least number of decimal places in the calculation. A calculator will add 6.3421 and 12.1 to give 18.4421 as a result. The least precise value was known to 0.1, so round the answer to 18.4.

Reading Check When you add measurements, how many significant figures should the result have?

**Figure 5** This ring toss can help you visualize how accuracy differs from precision.

**precision** (pree SIZH uhn) the exactness of a measurement

significant figure (sig NIF uh kuhnt FIG yuhr) a prescribed decimal place that determines the amount of rounding off to be done based on the precision of the measurement

**accuracy** (AK yur uh see) a description of how close a measurement is to the true value of the quantity measured

### QuickLab

# Precision Vs. Accuracy

- Crunch five pieces of paper into five paper balls.
- 2 Try to throw the balls into a **trash bin** that is 2 m in front of you.
- Move the trash bin 2 m farther away, and try to throw the balls into the bin.
- 4 How accurate were your throws when the bin was 2 m away? How precise were your throws?
- When the bin was moved farther away, were your accuracy and precision better or worse?

Math Skills Significant Figures Calculate the volume of a room that is 3.125 m high, 4.25 m wide, and 5.75 m long. Write the answer with the correct number of significant figures. Identify Given: length(l) = 5.75 mList the given and unknown width(w) = 4.25 mvalues. height(h) = 3.125 mUnknown:  $volume(V) = ? m^3$ Plan  $volume(V) = l \times w \times h$ Write the equation for volume.  $V = 5.75 \text{ m} \times 4.25 \text{ m} \times 3.125 \text{ m}$ Solve  $V = 76.3671875 \text{ m}^3$ Insert the known values into The value with the fewest signifithe equation, and solve. Practice **Hint** cant figures has three significant figures, so the answer should have When rounding to get the correct number three significant figures. of significant figures, do you round up or  $V = 76.4 \text{ m}^3$ down if the last digit is a 5? The correct way is to round to get an even number. For example, 3.25 is rounded to 3.2, and 3.35 is **Practice** rounded to 3.4. Using this simple rule, you 1. Perform the following calculations, and write the answer with the will generally round up half the time and correct number of significant figures. will round down half the time. See Math **a.**  $12.65 \text{ m} \times 42.1 \text{ m}$ Skills in Appendix B for more about signifi**b.** 3.244 m ÷ 1.4 s cant figures and rounding. For more practice, visit go.hrw.com and enter keyword HK8MP. Section 3 Review **KEY IDEAS** Math Skills 1. Describe the kind of data that you would display in 5. Convert the following measurements to scientific a line graph. notation. 2. **Describe** the kind of data that you would display in a. 15,400 mm<sup>3</sup> a pie graph. Give an example of data from everyday **b.** 2.050 mL experiences that could be placed in a pie graph. 6. Make the following calculations. 3. Explain in your own words why scientists use sig**a.**  $3.16 \times 10^3 \text{ m} \times 2.91 \times 10^4 \text{ m}$ nificant figures. **b.**  $1.85 \times 10^{-3} \text{ cm} \times 5.22 \times 10^{-2} \text{ cm}$ **CRITICAL THINKING** 7. Make the following calculations, and round the 4. Applying Concepts You throw three darts at a answer to the correct number of significant figures. dartboard. The darts all hit the board near the same **a.** 54.2 cm<sup>2</sup>  $\times$  22 cm spot close to the edge but far away from the bull's**b.** 23,500 m ÷ 89 s eye. Were your throws accurate or precise? Explain. 28 Chapter 1 Introduction to Science

| 0 | water into a 100 The top of the cylinder will have called a <i>menisc</i> below. Take you meniscus. Recodata table like t volumes of the | est tubes with tap water. Pour the 0 mL graduated cylinder. column of water in the graduated we a downward curve. This curve is us and is shown in the figure ar reading at the bottom of the rd the volume of the test tube in a the one below. Measure the other test tubes, and record their the average volume of the three test | Pour ab graduate as you of Gently of graduate water of may tilt down the and the table. D | out 20 mL of<br>ed cylinder. Rean in a data the<br>lrop a small of<br>ed cylinder. Be<br>ut of the cylinder so<br>the cylinder so<br>the side. Measu<br>object. Recoretermine the<br>ing the volum | tap water into a second the volume able like the or abject, such as a careful not to der. To prevent lightly and let ture the volume in volume of the one of the water | the 100 mL<br>ne as precisely<br>ne below.<br>In rock, into the<br>splash any<br>splashing, you<br>he object slide<br>of the water<br>in your data<br>object by |  |
|---|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--|
|   | Sample Data T                                                                                                                            | able: Liquid Volume  Volume (mL)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     | Sample                                                                                    | Data Table:                                                                                                                                                                                        | Volume of a S                                                                                                                                                          | Solid                                                                                                                                                           |  |
|   | Test tube 1 Test tube 2 Test tube 3 Average                                                                                              | DO NOT WRITE<br>IN BOOK                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              | Trial 1 Trial 2 Trial 3 Average                                                           |                                                                                                                                                                                                    | Volume of water only (mL)  DO NOT WRI IN BOOK                                                                                                                          | Volume of<br>object<br>(mL)                                                                                                                                     |  |
|   | 60<br>50<br>40                                                                                                                           | Meniscus                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |                                                                                           |                                                                                                                                                                                                    |                                                                                                                                                                        |                                                                                                                                                                 |  |

# Forming a

Science Skills

|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                | Key <b>Ideas</b>                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      | Key <b>Terms</b>                                                                                                                              |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Section 1 Th                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   | <ul> <li>Nature of Science</li> <li>How Science Takes Place A scientist may perform experiments to find a new aspect of the natural world, to explain a known phenomenon, to check the results of other experiments, or to test the predictions of current theories. (p. 5)</li> <li>The Branches of Science Most of the time, natural science is divided into biological science, physical science, and Earth science. (p. 7)</li> <li>Scientific Laws and Theories Theories explain why something happens, and laws describe how something works. Theories and laws are supported by scientific experiments. (p. 9)</li> </ul>      | science, p. 7<br>technology, p. 8<br>law, p. 9<br>theory, p. 9                                                                                |
| Section 2 Th                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   | <ul> <li>Way Science Works</li> <li>Science Skills Identifying problems, planning experiments, recording observations, and correctly reporting data are some of the most important skills in science. Scientists use scientific methods to find answers to their questions. (p. 14)</li> <li>Units of Measurement Scientists use standard units of measure that together form the International System of Units, or SI. (p. 17)</li> </ul>                                                                                                                                                                                            | critical thinking, p. 1-<br>scientific methods,<br>p. 15<br>variable, p. 15<br>length, p. 21<br>mass, p. 21<br>volume, p. 21<br>weight, p. 21 |
| Section 3 Organization of the section 3 Organization of the section 3 Organization of the section 3 Organization of the section of the section of the section of the section of the section of the section of the section of the section of the section of the section of the section of the section of the section of the section of the section of the section of the section of the section of the section of the section of the section of the section of the section of the section of the section of the section of the section of the section of the section of the section of the section of the section of the section of the section of the section of the section of the section of the section of the section of the section of the section of the section of the section of the section of the section of the section of the section of the section of the section of the section of the section of the section of the section of the section of the section of the section of the section of the section of the section of the section of the section of the section of the section of the section of the section of the section of the section of the section of the section of the section of the section of the section of the section of the section of the section of the section of the section of the section of the section of the section of the section of the section of the section of the section of the section of the section of the section of the section of the section of the section of the section of the section of the section of the section of the section of the section of the section of the section of the section of the section of the section of the section of the section of the section of the section of the section of the section of the section of the section of the section of the section of the section of the section of the section of the section of the section of the section of the section of the section of the section of the section of the section of the section of the section of the section of the section of the section of the section of the sectio | <ul> <li>Presenting Scientific Data Because scientists use written reports and oral presentations to share their results, organizing and presenting data are important science skills. (p. 22)</li> <li>Writing Numbers in Scientific Notation To reduce the number of zeros in very big and very small numbers, you can express the values as simple numbers multiplied by a power of 10, a method called scientific notation. (p. 24)</li> <li>Using Significant Figures Scientists use significant figures to show the precision of a measured quantity. Precision is the degree of exactness of a measurement. (p. 26)</li> </ul> | scientific notation,<br>p. 24<br>precision, p. 26<br>significant figure,<br>p. 26<br>accuracy, p. 27                                          |

| <b>Understanding</b>                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          | Concepts                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        | Reading Skills                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | ach question, write on a<br>er of the correct answer.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           | Directions (7): Read the passage below. Then, answer the question that follows.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            |
| A. 100 B. 1,000  2. A student is trying to study. The student is way that molecules What should the stuff. Botany G. biology  3. An astronomer is more between a comet are measurement should the stuff. B. centiliters  4. The universal gravite how the gravitation masses is inversely between them square gravitation equations. G. a scientific law. H. a scientific them. I. an experiment. Directions (5–6): For expense.  5. Density equals masses chemist is calculating substance with a known volume of 17 figures will the resulting significant them. In the world. We take the world. We take the world. We take the world. We take the world. We take the world. We take the world. We take the world. We take the world. We take the world. We take the world. We take the world. We take the world. We take the world. We take the world. We take the world. We take the world. We take the world. We take the world. We take the world. We take the world. We take the world. We take the world. We take the world. We take the world. We take the world. We take the world. We take the world. We take the world. We take the world. We take the world. We take the world. We take the world. We take the world. We take the world. We take the world. We take the world. We take the world. We take the world. We take the world. We take the world. We take the world. We take the world. We take the world. We take the world. We take the world. We take the world. We take the world. We take the world. We take the world. We take the world. We take the world. We take the world. We take the world. We take the world. We take the world. We take the world. We take the world. We take the world. We take the world. We take the world. We take the world. We take the world. We take the world. We take the world. We take the world. We take the world. We take the world. We take the world. We take the world. We take the world. We take the world. We take the world. We take the world. We take the world. We take the world. We take the world. We take the world. We take the world. We | H. geophysics I. biochemistry \neasuring the distance of the sun. What units of the astronomer use? C. kilometers D. micrograms  ation equation describes and attraction between two proportional to the distance or ed. What is the universal or each was all result ach question, write a short of a short of a sown mass of 23.523 g and a constant of the short of the constant of the short of the constant of the short of the short of the short of the short of the short of the short of the short of the short of the short of the short of the short of the short of the short of the short of the short of the short of the short of the short of the short of the short of the short of the short of the short of the short of the short of the short of the short of the short of the short of the short of the short of the short of the short of the short of the short of the short of the short of the short of the short of the short of the short of the short of the short of the short of the short of the short of the short of the short of the short of the short of the short of the short of the short of the short of the short of the short of the short of the short of the short of the short of the short of the short of the short of the short of the short of the short of the short of the short of the short of the short of the short of the short of the short of the short of the short of the short of the short of the short of the short of the short of the short of the short of the short of the short of the short of the short of the short of the short of the short of the short of the short of the short of the short of the short of the short of the short of the short of the short of the short of the short of the short of the short of the short of the short of the short of the short of the short of the short of the short of the short of the short of the short of the short of the short of the short of the short of the short of the short of the short of the short of the short of the short of the short of the short of the short of the short of the s | AIR MAY BE HEAVIER THAN YOU THINK In 1642, the Italian scientists Rafael Magiotti and Gasparo Berti attempted to produce a vacuum. They filled a long tube with water and plugged both ends. Then, they placed the tube upright into a basin of water and opened the bottom end of the tube. Only a portion of the water in the tube flowed out, and the water still inside the tube stayed at the level of 10.4 m. Air could not have filled the\nempty space in the tube because no air had been in contact with that space. This result seemed to suggest that a vacuum existed in the space above the water. Magiotti and Berti theorized that the attractive power of that vacuum caused some water to stay in the tube. Evangelista Torricelli had a different opinion. He hypothesized that air must have weight and that the weight of the air pressing down on the water in the basin kept all of the water in the tube from draining out. He performed the same experiment using mercury, which is 14 times as heavy as water. Mercury stopped flowing out of the tube when the level in the tube reached a height 14 times lower than the height at which water stopped. Thus, Torricelli's idea seemed to be confirmed.  7. What was the initial hypothesis of Magiotti and Berti?  A. A long tube filled with water, with both\nends plugged, was placed in a basin of water.  B. The weight of air on the basin kept all of the water from flowing out of the tube. C. The attractive force of the vacuum drew the water up the tube. D. A vacuum can exist. |

| Chapter 2 Matter 42 Chapter 3 States of Matter 74 Chapter 4 Atoms 110 Chapter 5 The Periodic Table 142 Chapter 6 The Structure of Matter 174 Chapter 7 Chemical Reactions 216 Chapter 8 Solutions 256 Chapter 9 Acids, Bases, and Salts 290 Chapter 10 Nuclear Changes 324 |    |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----|
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            | 41 |

These reading tools can help you learn the material in this chapter. For more information on how to use these and other tools, see **Appendix A.** 

### **Word Parts**

**Suffixes** The suffixes –*ity* and –*ness* usually change adjectives into nouns that denote a state, condition, or property. The root can help you understand the word's meaning.

**Your Turn** Two key terms in Section 2 use the suffix –ity. (Key terms in sections are indicated by bold text with yellow highlights.) On a sheet of paper, complete the table below for the missing key term. Then, think of two nouns that have the suffix –ness, and add those to your table.

| WORD    | ROOT  | SUFFIX | DEFINITION                                                       |
|---------|-------|--------|------------------------------------------------------------------|
| density | dense | -ity   | the quality of<br>being dense;<br>the ratio of<br>mass to volume |
|         |       | -ity   |                                                                  |

# **Finding Examples**

**Words that Signal Examples** Examples can help you picture an idea or concept. Certain words or phrases can serve as signals that an example is about to be introduced. Such signals include

- · for example
- · such as
- · for instance

**Your Turn** Make a list of the key terms from Section 1. See the sample list below. As you read Section 1, add examples that correspond to each key term. If a word or phrase in the text signals the example, add that word or phrase:

| KEY TERM  | EXAMPLES | SIGNAL WORDS |
|-----------|----------|--------------|
| · element | • carbon | (none)       |
|           | • copper |              |

## **Note Taking**

**Two-Column Notes** Two-column notes can help you learn the main ideas from each section.

**Your Turn** Complete two-column notes for the Key Ideas in this chapter.

- Write one Key Idea in each row in the left column.
- As you read the chapter, add detailed notes and examples in the right column. Be sure to put these details and examples in your own words.

| KEY IDEA                                          | DETAIL NOTES                                                                                                                                                 |
|---------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| How can matter be classified?                     | <ul> <li>Matter is either an element, a compound, or a mixture.</li> <li>Every sample of matter can be classified into one of these three groups.</li> </ul> |
| Why are carbon and copper classified as elements? | <ul> <li>Each element is made of one kind of atom.</li> <li>Diamonds are made up of carbon atoms</li> </ul>                                                  |

