---
course_chapter: 2
chapter_title: Matter
section: 2
section_title: Properties of Matter
---

# **Properties of Matter**

### Key Ideas

- Why are color, volume, and density classified as physical properties?
- **>** Why are flammability and reactivity classified as chemical properties?

### **Key Terms**

melting point boiling point density reactivity

### Why It Matters

Properties determine uses. For instance, the properties of a substance called *aerogel* enable it to trap fastmoving comet particles.

When playing sports, you choose a ball that has the shape and mass suitable for your game. It would be hard to play soccer with a football or to play softball with a bowling ball. The properties of the balls make the balls useful for different activities.

### **Physical Properties**

Shape and mass are examples of *physical properties*. Some other physical properties are color, volume, and texture. The balls in **Figure 1** have different physical properties. **> Physical properties are characteristics that can be observed without changing the identity of the substance.** For example, you can determine the color, mass, and shape of a ball without changing the substance that makes up the ball.

Physical properties are often very easy to observe. For instance, you can easily observe that a tennis ball is yellow, round, and fuzzy. Matter can also be described in terms of physical properties that are not as obvious. For example, a physical property of air is that it is colorless.

### Physical properties can help identify substances.

Because many physical properties remain constant, you can use your observations or measurements of these properties to identify substances. For example, you recognize your friends by their physical properties, such as height and hair color. At room temperature and under atmospheric pressure, all samples of pure water are colorless and liquid. Pure water is never a powdery green solid. The physical properties of water help you identify water.

Figure 1 The physical properties of these balls make the balls useful in different sports. How many physical properties can you observe?

# Physical properties can be observed or measured.

You can use your senses to observe some of the basic physical properties of a substance: shape, color, odor, and texture. Another physical property that you can observe is *state*—the physical form of a substance. Solid, liquid, and gas are three common states of matter. For example, water can be

Regardless of the mass or volume of water, the physical prop-

in the form of solid ice, liquid water, or gaseous steam.

Other physical properties, such as melting point and boiling point, can be measured. The temperature at which a

substance changes from a solid to a liquid is the melting point. The temperature at which a liquid changes to a gas is the boiling point. A characteristic of any pure substance is

READING

**Finding Examples** 

As you read this section, find

discussed. Don't forget to use signal words as clues. Make a

melting point (MELT ing POYNT) the

temperature and pressure at which a solid

boiling point (BOYL ing POYNT) the

temperature and pressure at which a liquid

becomes a liquid

becomes a gas

Academic Vocabulary

bending easily without breaking

wear or damage

durable (DUR uh buhl) able to withstand

Figure 2 Aluminum is light, strong, and durable, which makes

Matter

it ideal for use in foil.

Chapter 2

**52** 

flexible (FLEK suh buhl) capable of

examples for each property that is

table of properties and examples.

that its boiling point and its melting point are constant if the pressure remains the same. At sea level, water boils at 100 °C and freezes at 0 °C. At constant pressure, pure water always has the same boiling point and the same melting point.

erties of the water are the same. This principle is true for all pure substances.

Other physical properties that can be measured are

strength, hardness, and magnetism. The ability to conduct electricity or heat is also a physical property. For instance, copper conducts electricity well, while plastic does not.

Physical properties help determine uses.

Every day, you use physical properties to recognize sub-

into a metal cup?

stances. Physical properties help you decide whether your socks are clean (odor), whether your books will fit in your backpack (volume), or whether your clothes match (color).

Physical properties are often used to select substances that may be useful. Copper is used in power lines, telephone lines, and electric motors because it conducts electricity well. As **Figure 2** shows, aluminum is used in foil because it is light-

weight yet <u>durable</u> and <u>flexible</u>. Car frames are made of steel, which is a strong solid that provides structure. Tires are made of a flexible solid that cushions your ride. Antifreeze is used in car radiators because it remains a liquid at temperatures that

would freeze or boil water.

Can you think of other physical properties that help us determine how we can use a substance? Some substances have the ability to conduct heat, while others do not. Plasticfoam cups do not conduct heat well, so they are often used for

1

holding hot drinks. What would happen if you poured hot tea

Quick Lab

Density is different from weight.

**Density of Water** 

graduated cylinder.

volumes of water.

**Procedure** 

I Find the mass of an empty 100 mL

4 Use graph paper or a graphing

calculator to plot volume (on the

x-axis) versus mass (on the y-axis).

**Analysis** 1. Estimate the mass of 55 mL of

2 Pour 10 mL of water from a 250 mL beaker into the graduated

cylinder. Use a balance to find the

mass of the graduated cylinder that contains the water.

water and 85 mL of water.

2. Predict the volume of 25 g of water and 75 g of water.

3. Use your graph to determine the

density of water.

Figure 3 Helium-filled balloons

brick has more matter in a

which has less volume?

float because helium is less dense than air. Hot-air balloons rise for a similar reason. Which is less

dense: hot air or cool air?

Figure 4 This brick is denser than this sponge because the

similar volume. If a brick and

a sponge have equal masses,

Properties of Matter 55

Denser

More mass

with something else of the same volume. The balloons in Figure 3 float because the denser air sinks around them. A

3 Repeat Step 2 for several different

substance that has a high density is "heavy" in comparison with another object of the same volume. A stone sinks to the

bottom of a pond because the stone is denser than the water. The brick and sponge shown in Figure 4 have similar

volumes, but the brick is more massive than the sponge. Because the brick has more mass per unit of volume than the

A substance that has a low density is "light" in comparison

sponge does, the brick is denser. If you held the brick in one hand and the sponge in the other hand, you would know instantly that the brick is denser than the sponge.

Although the denser brick feels heavier than the sponge, weight and density are different. In the example of a brick and sponge, both objects have about the same volume. But com-

pare two objects that have different volumes. Two pounds of feathers are heavier than one pound of steel. But the feathers are less dense than the steel, so two pounds of feathers have a

greater volume than one pound of steel does.

Section 2

Less mass Less dense

### QuickLab @10 min

### Reactivity

- Measure 4 g each of compounds A and B. Place them in separate clear plastic cups.
- Observe the color and texture of each compound. Record your observations.
- 3 Add 5 mL of vinegar to each cup. Record your observations.
- Baking soda reacts with vinegar, but powdered sugar does not. Which of these two substances is compound A, and which is compound B?

### Physical and chemical properties are different.

It is important to remember the differences between physical and chemical properties. You can observe physical properties without changing the identity of the substance. But you can observe chemical properties only in situations in which the identity of the substance changes.

Figure 6 summarizes the physical and chemical properties of a few common substances. Some substances have similar physical properties but different chemical properties. Other substances have similar chemical properties but different physical properties. For example, wood and rubbing alcohol both have the chemical property of flammability, but they have different physical properties.

Figure 6 Comparison of Physical and Chemical Properties

| Substance         | Wood                 | Iron                               | Red dye                            |
|-------------------|----------------------|------------------------------------|------------------------------------|
|                   |                      |                                    |                                    |
| Physical property | has a grainy texture | bends without<br>breaking          | has red color                      |
| Chemical property | is flammable         | reacts with oxygen<br>to form rust | reacts with bleach;<br>loses color |

### Section 2 Review

### **KEY IDEAS**

- 1. List two physical properties and two chemical properties.
- 2. Identify the following as physical properties or chemical properties.
  - a. reacts with water
- e. boils at 100 °C
- **b.** is red
- **f.** is nonflammable
- c. is shiny and silvery
- g. has a low density
- d. melts easily
- h. tarnishes in moist air

### CRITICAL THINKING

3. Applying Concepts Describe several uses for plastic, and explain why plastic is a good choice for these purposes.

4. Making Inferences Suppose that you need to build a raft. Write a paragraph describing the physical and chemical properties of the raft that would be important to ensure your safety.

### Math Skills

- 5. Calculate the density of a rock that has a mass of 454 g and a volume of 100.0 cm<sup>3</sup>.
- 6. Calculate the density of a substance in a sealed 2,500 cm3 flask that is full to capacity with 0.36 g of
- 7. A sample of copper has a volume of 23.4 cm<sup>3</sup>. If the density of copper is 8.9 g/cm<sup>3</sup>, what is the copper's mass?

