---
course_chapter: 2
chapter_title: Matter
section: 3
section_title: Changes of Matter
---

# **Changes of Matter**

### Key **Ideas**

- Why is a getting a haircut an example of a physical change?
- Why is baking bread an example of a chemical change?
- ▶ How can mixtures and compounds be broken down?

### **Key Terms**

physical change chemical change

### Why It **Matters**

The process of making glass—for practical applications or as art—involves both physical and chemical changes.

Leaves change color in the fall, an ice cube melts in your glass, and bread dough turns into bread when it bakes in the oven. Such changes occur in matter as a result of physical or chemical changes.

### **Physical Changes**

If you break a piece of chalk, you change its physical properties of size and shape. But no matter how many times you break the chalk, its chemical properties remain unchanged. The chalk is still chalk, and each piece of chalk would produce bubbles if you placed it in vinegar. Breaking chalk is an example of a physical change. A physical change affects one or more physical properties of a substance without changing the identity of the substance.

**Figure 1** shows several examples of physical changes. Some other examples of physical changes are dissolving sugar in water, sanding a piece of wood, and mixing oil and vinegar.

**physical change** (FIZ i kuhl CHAYNJ) a change of matter from one form to another without a change in chemical properties

**Figure 3** When sugar dissolves in water, the water molecules attract the sugar molecules and pull them apart. As a result, the sugar molecules spread out in the water.

### Physical changes do not change a substance's identity.

Melting a gold nugget to form a gold ring involves several physical changes, as **Figure 2** shows. The gold changes from solid to liquid and then back to solid. The shape of the gold also changes. The gold nugget becomes a ring of gold. But these physical changes do not change all of the properties of the gold. For example, the gold's color, melting point, and density do not change.

During a physical change, energy is absorbed or released. After a physical change, a substance may look different, but the arrangement of atoms that make up the substance is not changed. A gold nugget, molten gold, and gold rings are all made of gold atoms.

### Dissolving is a physical change.

When you stir sugar into water, the sugar dissolves and seems to disappear. But the sugar is still there. You can taste the sweetness when you drink the water. What happened to the sugar?

**Figure 3** shows sugar molecules dissolving in water. (The sugar and water molecules are represented as spheres to simplify the diagram.) When sugar dissolves, the sugar molecules become spread out between the water molecules. The molecules of the sugar do not change. So, dissolving is an example of a physical change.

### **Chemical Changes**

Some materials are useful because of their ability to change and combine to form new substances. For example, the compounds in gasoline burn in the presence of oxygen to form carbon dioxide and water. The burning of the compounds is a chemical change. A chemical change happens when one or more substances are changed into entirely new substances that have different properties. The chemical properties of a substance describe which chemical changes can happen. You can learn about chemical properties by observing chemical changes.

Reading Check What is the difference between a physical change and a chemical change?

### Chemical changes happen everywhere.

You see chemical changes happening more often than you may think. When a battery dies, the chemicals inside the battery have changed, so the battery can no longer supply energy. The oxygen that you inhale when you breathe is used in a series of chemical reactions in your body. After the oxygen reacts with molecules containing carbon, the oxygen is then exhaled as part of the compound carbon dioxide. Chemical changes occur when fruits and vegetables ripen and when the food you eat is digested. **Figure 4** shows some other examples of chemical changes.

chemical change (KEM i kuhl CHAYNJ) a change that occurs when one or more substances change into entirely new substances with different properties

Figure 4 Examples of Chemical Changes

Chemical reactions produce pigments that give leaves their colors. In the fall, green leaves change colors as different reactions take place.

When effervescent tablets are added to water, the citric acid and baking soda in them react to produce carbon dioxide, which forms bubbles.

The shiny, orange-brown copper of the Statue of Liberty has reacted with carbon dioxide and water to form green copper compounds.

Why It **Matters** 

# **How Is Glass Made?**

People have been making glass for thousands of years. The raw

batch. When the batch is heated to

materials of sand, limestone, and soda ash are heated and turned

A glass blower dips a hol-

1. After the molten glass has been shaped, it cools and solidifies. Is this a physical change or a chemical change?

Topic: Glass

Code: HK80678

65

low iron blowpipe into the hot mixture and picks up a gob of molten glass. The blower occasionally reheats the glass to keep it soft.

into glass through chemical changes. Several physical changes, including changes in state, shape, and size, also occur. There are different ways to shape the glass once it has been made. One method, called glass blowing, is illustrated below.

Glassmakers often

purchase the raw ingredients-sand, limestone, and soda ash-mixed together in a form called

about 1,500 °C, the mixture becomes transparent and flows like honey.

YOUR UNDERSTANDING CONCEPTS

bulb that can be pulled,

WRITING IN SCIENCE 2. Research another method of shaping glass, such as pressing, drawing, or casting.

Write a paragraph describing By turning the sticky glob and blowing into this method. the tube, the glass blower creates a hollow

twisted, and blown into different shapes. When the finished shape is broken from the tube, a work of art has been

# **Converting Units**

conversion value must also be cubed.

**b.** grams per cubic meter  $(g/m^3)$ 

**3.** Find the density of helium in grams per cubic

4. Will the density of gasoline in grams per cubic

5. What is the density of iron in grams per cubic

Matter

meter be greater than or less than the value given

in the table? To see if you are correct, convert the

value given in the table to grams per cubic meter.

Solve

and solve.

Practice

millimeter?

meter?

Chapter 2

Science Skills

**Problem Technology** Math Density can be expressed in grams per cubic centimeter (g/cm<sup>3</sup>). The density of lead is 11.3 g/cm<sup>3</sup>. What is the **Scientific Methods** density of lead in grams per cubic millimeter (g/mm<sup>3</sup>)? Graphing Solution Identify Given: density,  $d = 11.3 \text{ g/cm}^3$ List the given and unknown values. Unknown: density,  $d = ? g/mm^3$ Plan Determine the relationship between **a.** 1 cm = 10 mmunits. Because cm is cubed, the

> **b.** density in  $g/mm^3 = density in \frac{g}{cm^3} \times \frac{1 cm^3}{1,000 mm^3}$ **b.** Write the equation for the conversion. Use the units as a guide. If the units don't cancel properly, you may have the conversion equation backwards. density in g/mm<sup>3</sup> =  $\frac{11.3 \text{ g}}{\text{em}^3} \times \frac{1 \text{ em}^3}{1,000 \text{ mm}^3}$ Insert the known values into the equation,

Use the table to answer the following questions. **Substance** 

1. Find the density of dry air in the following units: Air (dry) a. grams per cubic millimeter (g/mm<sup>3</sup>) Brick (common) 2. What is the density of water in grams per cubic

 $d = 0.0113 \,\mathrm{g/mm^3}$ 

Gasoline Helium Ice Iron

> Lead Nitrogen Steel Water

 $1 \text{ cm}^3 = (10 \text{ mm})^3 = 1,000 \text{ mm}^3$ 

Density (g/cm<sup>3</sup>)

0.00129

0.00018

0.00125

1.9

0.7

0.92 7.86

11.3

7.8

1.00

**Chapter Outline** 

Kinetic Theory States of Matter Energy's Role

**1** Matter and Energy

Ochanges of State

Behavior of Gases
Properties of Gases

Gas Laws

74

Energy

Fluids
Pressure
Buoyant Force
Pascal's Principle
Fluids in Motion

Energy and Changes of State Conservation of Mass and

