---
course_chapter: 3
chapter_title: States of Matter
section: 2
section_title: Changes of State
---

# **Changes of State**

### **Key Ideas**

- What happens when a substance changes from one state of matter to another?
- What happens to mass and energy during physical and chemical changes?

### Key **Terms**

evaporation sublimation condensation

### Why It **Matters**

The evaporation that occurs when you sweat helps to keep your body cool in warm weather.

What causes dew drops to form or causes ice to melt? These changes of state—conversions of a substance from one physical form to another—are caused by energy transfers.

### **Energy and Changes of State**

Five changes of state of water are shown in **Figure 1.** The ice, liquid water, and steam are all the same substance—water,  $H_2O$ . But they all have different amounts of energy. The identity of a substance does not change during a change of state, but the energy of a substance does change.

If energy is added to a substance, its particles move faster. If energy is removed, the substance's particles move slower. For instance, the particles in steam have more energy than the particles in liquid water. A transfer of energy known as *heat* causes the temperature of a substance to change. If enough energy is added or removed, the substance will change state.

evaporation (ee VAP uh RAY shuhn) the change of state from a liquid to a gas sublimation (SUHB luh MAY shuhn) the process in which a solid changes directly into a gas

# **Some changes of state require energy.**A solid changes to a liquid by melting. Heating a solid

a liquid boils is the liquid's boiling point.

You can feel the effects of an energy change when you sweat. Energy is needed to separate the particles of a liquid to form a gas. As you sweat, energy from your body is transferred to sweat molecules as heat. This energy transfer

depends on the pressure.

Why It **Matters** 

cools your body.

Nitrogen molecule in air

Sweat droplet

The molecules in sweat on your skin gain energy from your body and move faster. Eventually, the fastest-moving particles break away, and the sweat evaporates. This loss of energy by the body makes

the body feel cooler.

transfers energy to the particles, which vibrate faster as they gain energy. Eventually, they break from their fixed positions,

and the solid melts. The *melting point* is the temperature at which a substance changes from solid to liquid. Melting point

Solids can also change directly into gases in a process

called **sublimation.** In **Figure 2**, solid carbon dioxide (dry ice)

Do People Sweat?

Water vapor in air

Oxygen molecule in air

changes into gaseous carbon dioxide. Ice cubes in a freezer

will eventually get smaller, as the ice sublimes. Note that melting, evaporation, and sublimation all require energy.

Reading Check What is one example of sublimation?

**Evaporation** is the change of a substance from a liquid to a gas. Boiling is evaporation that occurs throughout a liquid at a specific temperature and pressure. The temperature at which

Figure 2 Solid dry ice changes

of state is shown here?

YOUR

**CRITICAL THINKING**1. Does your body take in

energy or give off energy

during sweating? Explain.

directly into a gas. Which change

### INKS.

w.scilinks.org

**Figure 5** Energy is conserved when gasoline is burned to power

Section 2 Review

**1. Describe** the following changes of state, and

explain how particles behave in each state.

2. State whether energy is released or whether energy

is required for the following changes of state to take

States of Matter

c. sublimation

c. sublimation

d. condensation

d. melting

a lawn mower.

**KEY IDEAS** 

a. freezing

**b.** boiling

a. melting

b. evaporation

Chapter 3

place.

88

Topic: Conservation of Energy

Code: HK80345

### Mass cannot be created or destroyed.

of mass.

servation of energy.

energy that is produced.

transferred to the surroundings as heat.

In chemical changes, as well as in physical changes, the total mass of the substances undergoing the change stays the same before and after the change. In other words, mass can-

not be created or destroyed, which is the *law of conservation* 

For instance, when you burn a match, it seems to lose mass. The ash has less mass than the match. But the oxygen that reacts with the match, the tiny smoke particles, and the gases formed in the reaction also have mass. The total mass of the reactants (the match and oxygen) is the same as the total

Energy may be changed to another form during a physical

or chemical change, but the total amount of energy present

before and after the change is the same. In other words, energy cannot be created or destroyed, which is the *law of con-*

Starting a lawn mower, as **Figure 5** shows, may seem to violate the law of conservation of energy, but that is not the case. It is true that for the small amount of energy needed to start the mower, a lot of energy results. But the mower needs gasoline to run. Gasoline has stored energy that is released when it is burned. When the stored energy is considered, the energy present before you start the lawn mower is equal to the

Some of the energy from the gasoline is transferred to the surroundings as heat, which is why the lawn mower gets hot. The total amount of energy released by the gasoline is equal to the energy used to power the lawn mower plus the energy

Describe the role of energy when ice melts and when water vapor condenses to form liquid water.

4. State the law of conservation of mass and the law

of conservation of energy, and explain how they

5. Drawing Conclusions If you used dry ice in your

holiday punch, would it become watery after an

apply to changes of state.

hour? Why or why not?

**CRITICAL THINKING** 

mass of the products (the ash, smoke, and gases).

**Energy cannot be created or destroyed.** 

# QuickLab

