---
course_chapter: 3
chapter_title: States of Matter
section: 3
section_title: Fluids
---

### **Density and Shape**

### **Procedure**

- Roll two equal pieces of clay into two balls (the size of golf balls).
   Drop the first ball into a container of water. Record your observations.
- 2 Flatten the second ball until it is thinner than your little finger, and press it into the shape of a canoe.

3 Place the clay boat gently into the water. Record your observations.

### **Analysis**

- 1. How does the change of shape affect the buoyant force?
- 2. How is the change of shape related to the overall density of the boat?

### An object will float or sink based on its density.

You can also determine if a substance will float or sink by comparing densities. For example, the density of a brick is about  $2 \, \text{g/cm}^3$ , and the density of water is  $1.00 \, \text{g/cm}^3$ . The brick will sink in water because it is denser than the water. On the other hand, helium has about one-seventh the density of air. A given volume of helium in a balloon displaces a volume of air that is much heavier than helium, so the balloon floats.

Steel is almost eight times denser than water. And yet huge steel ships cruise the oceans with ease. They even carry very heavy loads. But substances that are denser than water will sink in water. Given this, how does a steel ship float?

The shape of the ship allows the ship to float. Imagine a ship that was just a big block of steel, as shown on the left in **Figure 4.** If you put that steel block into water, it would sink. But ships are built with a hollow shape. The amount of steel is the same, but the hollow shape decreases the ship's density. Water is denser than the hollow ship, so the ship floats.

Reading Check How can you use density to determine if an object will float?

### Integrating **Biology**

Swim Bladders Some fish can adjust their density so that they can stay at a certain depth in the water. Most fish have an organ called a swim bladder, which is filled with gases. The inflated swim bladder increases the fish's volume, decreases the fish's overall density, and keeps the fish from sinking. The fish's nervous system controls the amount of gas in the bladder based on the fish's depth. Some fish, such as sharks, do not have a swim bladder. So, they must swim constantly to keep from sinking.

### READING TOOLBOX

### **Laws and Principles**

Write down all of the scientific laws or principles that are covered in this section. State each one in your own words, and list the conditions under which the law or principle is true.

### **Pascal's Principle**

What happens when you squeeze one end of a tube of toothpaste? Toothpaste usually comes out the opposite end because the pressure you apply is transmitted throughout the toothpaste. So, the increased pressure near the open end of the tube forces the toothpaste out. This phenomenon is explained by Pascal's principle, which was discovered by the French scientist Blaise Pascal in the 17th century.

Pascal's principle

A change in pressure at any point in an enclosed fluid will be transmitted equally to all parts of the fluid.

In other words, if the pressure in a container is increased at any point, the pressure increases at all points by the same amount. Mathematically, Pascal's principle is stated as  $P_1 = P_2$ . Because P = F/A, Pascal's principle can be expressed  $F_1/A_1 = F_2/A_2$ .

### Hydraulic devices are based on Pascal's principle.

Hydraulic devices use liquids to transmit pressure from one point to another. Because liquids cannot be compressed into a much smaller space, they can transmit pressure more efficiently than gases can. Hydraulic devices can multiply forces. For example, in Figure 5, a small downward force is applied to a small area. This force exerts pressure on the liquid in the device, such as oil. According to Pascal's principle, this pressure is transmitted equally to a larger area, where the pressure creates a larger force. Note that the plunger travels through a larger distance on the side that has the smaller area.

Reading Check How does a hydraulic device multiply force?

**Figure 5** Because the pressure is the same on both sides of the enclosed fluid in a hydraulic lift, a small force on the smaller area (left) produces a much larger force on the larger area (right).

### Math Skills Pascal's Principle

A hydraulic lift uses Pascal's principle to lift a 19,000 N car. If the area of the small piston  $(A_1)$  equals 10.5 cm<sup>2</sup> and the area of the large piston  $(A_2)$  equals 400 cm<sup>2</sup>, what force needs to be exerted on the small piston to lift the car?

| er | • |
|----|---|
|    |   |
|    |   |

List the given and unknown values.

### Given:

$$\begin{split} F_2 &= 19,000 \ \mathrm{N} \\ A_1 &= 10.5 \ \mathrm{cm}^2 \\ A_2 &= 400 \ \mathrm{cm}^2 \end{split}$$

### Unknown:

$$F_1 = ? N$$

### Plan

Start with Pascal's principle, and substitute the equation for pressure. Then, rearrange the equation to isolate the unknown value.

$$P_1 = P_2$$

$$\frac{F_1}{A_1} = \frac{F_2}{A_2}$$

$$F_1 = \frac{(F_2)(A_1)}{A_2}$$

### Solve

Insert the known values into the equation, and solve.

$$F_1 = \frac{(19,000 \text{ N})(10.5 \text{ cm}^2)}{400 \text{ cm}^2}$$

$$F_1 = 500 \text{ N}$$

### **Practice**

1. In a car's liquid-filled, hydraulic brake system, the master cylinder has an area of 0.5 cm<sup>2</sup>, and the wheel cylinders each have an area of 3.0 cm<sup>2</sup>. If a force of 150 N is applied to the master cylinder by the brake pedal, what force does each wheel cylinder exert on its brake pad?

For more practice, visit go.hrw.com and enter keyword HK8MP.

### Practice **Hint**

> The pressure equation

$$pressure = \frac{force}{area}$$

can be used to find pressure or can be rearranged to find force or area.

$$force = (pressure)(area)$$

$$area = \frac{force}{pressure}$$

### **Fluids in Motion**

Examples of moving fluids include liquids flowing through pipes, air moving as wind, or honey dripping, as **Figure 6** shows. Fluids in motion have some properties in common. Have you ever used a garden hose? When you place your thumb over the end of the hose, your thumb blocks some of the area through which the water flows out of the hose. Because the area is smaller, the water exits at a faster speed.

> Fluids move faster through small areas than through larger areas, if the overall flow rate remains constant. Fluids also vary in the rate at which they flow.

**Figure 6** Dripping honey is an example of a fluid in motion.

**viscosity** (vis KAHS uh tee) the resistance of a gas or liquid to flow

Figure 7 This leaf speeds up when it enters the narrow part of the pipe, where there is less pressure. How does this example illustrate Bernoulli's principle?

### Viscosity depends on particle attraction.

Honey dripping from a spoon flows more slowly than lemonade poured from a pitcher. A liquid's resistance to flow is called **viscosity.** In general, the stronger the attraction between a liquid's particles is, the more viscous the liquid is. Honey flows more slowly than lemonade because honey has a higher viscosity than lemonade.

### Fluid pressure decreases as speed increases.

Imagine a waterlogged leaf being carried along by water in a pipe, as **Figure 7** shows. The water will move faster through the narrow part of the pipe than through the wider part. Therefore, as the water carries the leaf into the narrow part of the pipe, the leaf moves faster.

If you measure the pressure at different points, you would find that the water pressure in front of the leaf is less than the pressure behind the leaf. The pressure difference causes the leaf and the water around it to accelerate as the leaf enters the narrow part of the tube. This behavior illustrates a general principle, known as *Bernoulli's principle*, which states that as the speed of a moving fluid increases, the pressure of the moving fluid decreases. This property of moving fluids was first described in the 18th century by Daniel Bernoulli, a Swiss mathematician.

### Section 3 Review

### KEY IDEAS

- **1. Explain** how differences in fluid pressure create buoyant force on an object.
- **2. State** Archimedes' principle, and give an example of how you could determine a buoyant force.
- 3. State Pascal's principle. Give an example of its use.
- Compare the viscosity of milk and the viscosity of molasses.

### **CRITICAL THINKING**

- Applying Concepts An object weighs 20 N. It displaces a volume of water that weighs 15 N.
  - a. What is the buoyant force on the object?
  - **b.** Will the object float or sink? Explain.
- 6. Drawing Conclusions Iron has a density of 7.9 g/cm<sup>3</sup>. Mercury has a density of 13.6 g/cm<sup>3</sup>. Will iron float or sink in mercury? Explain.

- Making Inferences Two boats in a flowing river are sailing side-by-side with only a narrow space between them.
  - a. What happens to the fluid speed and the pressure between the two boats?
  - **b.** How could the changes in fluid speed and pressure lead to a collision of the boats?

### Math Skills

- **8.** A water bed that has an area of 3.75 m<sup>2</sup> weighs 1,025 N. Find the pressure that the water bed exerts on the floor.
- 9. The small piston of a hydraulic lift has an area of 0.020 m<sup>2</sup>. A car weighing 12,000 N is mounted on the large piston (area = 0.90 m<sup>2</sup>). What force must be applied to the small piston to support the car?

Why It Matters

# **How Do Submarines Work?**

A submarine is a type of ship that can travel both on the surface of the

water and underwater. Submarines have special ballast tanks that control their buoyancy. The crew can control the amount of water in the tanks to control the submarine's depth, as shown below. The first submarine was used in 1776 during the American

Revolution. It was a one-person, hand-powered, wooden vessel. Most modern submarines are built of metals and use nuclear power, which

enables them to remain submerged almost indefinitely.

When a submarine is floating on the

surface, its ballast tanks are filled mostly with air. Ballast tanks

When the submarine dives, the ballast tanks are opened to allow sea water to flow in. This water adds

mass and increases the submarine's density, so the submarine descends into the ocean.

**UNDERSTANDING CONCEPTS** 1. How do submarines use ballast

tanks to control their depth? **CRITICAL THINKING** 2. Identify the advantages of using metals instead of wood in the construction of today's

To bring the submarine through the water and to the surface, compressed air is blown into the

ballast tanks to force the water out.

submarines.

www.scilinks.org Topic: Submarines and Undersea Technology Code: HK81474

95

