---
course_chapter: 3
chapter_title: States of Matter
section: 4
section_title: Behavior of Gases
---

### The product of pressure and volume is constant.

Boyle's law tells you that when pressure increases, volume decreases, and vice versa. In mathematical terms, pressure multiplied by volume is constant (if temperature is constant). This is expressed as follows:

$$(pressure_1)(volume_1) = (pressure_2)(volume_2)$$
  
 $P_1V_1 = P_2V_2$ 

 $P_1$  and  $V_1$  represent the <u>initial</u> volume and pressure, while  $P_2$  and  $V_2$  represent the final volume and pressure.

### **Academic Vocabulary**

initial (i NISH uhl) first final (FIEN uhl) last

# SCI<sub>INKS</sub>.

### www.scilinks.org

Topic: Gas Laws Code: HK80637

### Math Skills Boyle's Law

The gas in a balloon has a volume of 7.5 L at 100.0 kPa. In the atmosphere, the gas expands to a volume of 11 L. Assuming a constant temperature, what is the final pressure in the balloon?

### Identify

List the given and unknown values.

### Given:

$$\begin{split} V_1 &= 7.5 \; \mathrm{L} \\ P_1 &= 100.0 \; \mathrm{kPa} \\ V_2 &= 11 \; \mathrm{L} \end{split}$$

### Unknown:

$$P_2 =$$
? kPa

### Plan

Write the equation for Boyle's law, and rearrange to solve for  $P_2$ .

$$P_1V_1 = P_2V_2$$

$$P_2\!=\!\frac{P_1V_1}{V_2}$$

### Solve

Insert the known values into the equation, and solve.

$$P_2 = \frac{(100.0 \text{ kPa})(7.5 \text{ L})}{11 \text{ L}}$$

$$P_2 = 68 \text{ kPa}$$

### Practice

- 1. A flask contains 155 cm<sup>3</sup> of hydrogen at a pressure of 22.5 kPa. Under what pressure would the gas have a volume of 90.0 cm<sup>3</sup> at the same temperature? (Recall that 1 cm<sup>3</sup> = 1 mL.)
- 2. If the pressure exerted on a 300.0 mL sample of hydrogen gas at constant temperature is increased from 0.500 kPa to 0.750 kPa, what will be the final volume of the sample?
- 3. A sample of oxygen gas has a volume of 150 mL at a pressure of 0.947 kPa. If the temperature remains constant, what will the volume of the gas be at a pressure of 1.000 kPa?

For more practice, visit **go.hrw.com** and enter keyword **HK8MP**.

### Practice **Hint**

Problems 2 and 3: The equation for Boyle's law can be rearranged to solve for volume in the following way.

Start with the equation for Boyle's Law:

$$P_1V_1 = P_2V_2$$

Divide both sides by P<sub>2</sub>:

$$\frac{P_1 V_1}{P_2} = \frac{P_2 V_2}{P_2}$$

After you cancel like terms, you are left with the final volume.

$$\frac{P_1 V_1}{P_2} = V_2$$

### Gay-Lussac's law relates gas pressure to temperature.

What would you predict about the relationship between the pressure and temperature of a gas at constant volume? Remember that pressure is the result of collisions of gas molecules against the walls of their containers. As temperature increases, the kinetic energy of the gas particles increases. The energy and frequency of the collision of gas particles against their containers increases. For a fixed quantity of gas at constant volume, the pressure increases as the temperature increases. This property of gases is sometimes known as Gay-Lussac's law.

Gay-Lussac's law The pressure of a gas increases as the temperature increases, if the volume of the gas does not change. The pressure decreases as the temperature decreases.

If you often measure the pressure in your bicycle tire, as **Figure 3** shows, you may notice that the tire pressure in the winter is lower than it is in the summer. As the temperature outside decreases, the tire pressure also decreases. When the temperature outside rises, the tire pressure rises. Notice that in this example, the volume is constant.

If pressurized containers that hold gases, such as spray cans, are heated, the containers may explode. You should always be careful to keep containers of pressurized gas away from heat sources.

Reading Check If volume is constant and temperature decreases, how does pressure change?

**Procedure** 

Figure 3 The pressure in a bicycle tire increases when temperature increases. Which gas law does this illustrate?

# Inquiry Lab

# How Are Temperature and Volume Related?

### 20 mars (1900) 4 1 20 m 44 20 m (4) 2 m m 20 m 1

- Fill an aluminum pan with 5 cm of water. Put the pan on a hot plate.
- 2 Fill a second aluminum pan with 5 cm of ice water.
- 3 Blow up a balloon inside a 250 mL beaker. The balloon should fill the beaker but should not extend outside it. Tie the balloon at its opening.
- Place the beaker and balloon in the ice water. Record your observations.

Semove the balloon and beaker from the ice water. Observe the balloon for several minutes, and record any changes.

( 30 min

Next, put the beaker and balloon in the hot water. Record your observations.

### **Analysis**

- 1. How did changing the temperature affect the volume of the balloon?
- **2.** Is the density of a gas affected by temperature? Explain.

Figure 4 Charles's Law

When the temperature is decreased, the gas particles move more slowly and hit the sides of the piston with less force. As a result, the volume decreases.

When the temperature is increased, the gas particles move faster and hit the sides of the piston with more force. As a result, the volume increases.

### Charles's law relates temperature to volume.

Another gas law, Charles's law, is shown by the model in **Figure 4.** Each illustration shows the same piston and the same amount of gas at the same pressure.

Charles's law For a fixed amount of gas at a constant pressure, the volume of the gas increases as the gas's temperature increases. Likewise, the volume of the gas decreases as the gas's temperature decreases.

Because of Charles's law, an inflated balloon will pop when it gets too hot. Or, as **Figure 5** shows, if the gas in an inflated balloon is cooled (at constant pressure), the volume of gas will decrease and cause the volume of the balloon to shrink. You can observe another example by putting an inflated balloon in the freezer and waiting about 10 minutes to see what happens.

**Figure 5** This experiment illustrates Charles's law.

Air-filled balloons are exposed to liquid nitrogen.

The low temperature of the liquid nitrogen makes the balloons shrink in volume.

When the balloons are removed from the liquid nitrogen and warmed, they expand to their original volume.

### **Graphing Skills Interpreting Graphs**

The top graph shows volume versus temperature for a gas at a constant pressure. What can be determined from this graph about the relationship between volume and temperature?

In a direct relationship, the two variables change in the same direction. In an inverse relationship, they change in opposite directions. In this graph, temperature increases as volume increases, so the relationship is direct.

2 Study the shape of the line.

If a graph is a straight line, one variable is directly or inversely proportional to the other. If a graph is a curve, the relationship is more complex. Because this graph is a straight line, temperature is directly proportional to volume.

### **Practice**

- 1. Which gas law does the straight-line graph represent?
- 2. Is the relationship shown by the curve in the bottom graph a direct relationship or an inverse relationship?
- 3. Is this relationship proportional?
- 4. Which gas law is represented by the curved graph?

### Volume Versus Temperature for a Gas at a Constant Pressure 0.700 0.600 0.500 0.400 0.300 0.200 0.100 0.000 100 200 300 Temperature (K)

# Section 4 Review

### **KEY IDEAS**

- 1. List four properties of gases.
- 2. Explain why the volume of a gas can change.
- 3. Describe how gases are different from solids and liquids, and give examples.
- 4. Identify what causes the pressure exerted by gas molecules on their container.
- 5. Restate Boyle's law, Charles's law, and Gay-Lussac's law in your own words.

### **CRITICAL THINKING**

- 6. Applying Concepts Identify a real-life example for each of the three gas laws.
- 7. Making Inferences Why do gases have low densities?

- 8. Relating Concepts When scientists record the volume of a gas, why do they also record the temperature and the pressure?
- **9. Making Predictions** Predict what would happen to the volume of a balloon left on a sunny windowsill. Which gas law predicts this result?

### Math Skills

10. A partially inflated weather balloon has a volume of 1.56  $\times$  10<sup>3</sup> L and a pressure of 98.9 kPa. What is the volume of the balloon when the balloon is released to a height where the pressure is 44.1 kPa?

What You'll Do

> Test your hypothesis by

measuring the temperature of water as it boils and freezes.

> Graph data, and interpret the

slopes of the graphs.

What You'll Need

beaker, 250 mL or 400 mL

graduated cylinder, 100 mL

stirring device, wire loop

102 Chapter 3

States of Matter

clamp

hot plate

ice, crushed

paper, graph

ring stand

rock salt

stopwatch

Safety

water

thermometer

coffee can, large

gloves, heat-resistant

🍪 50 min

**Boiling and Freezing** Adding or removing energy from a substance often causes its tempera-

ture to change. But does the temperature of a substance always change when the substance's energy changes? In this lab, you will investigate this question with a common substance-water.

Ask a Question

When you add or remove energy from water, does its temperature always change?

**Forming and Testing a Hypothesis** 

Make some predictions. What happens to the temperature of boiling water as the boiling process continues? What happens to the temperature of freezing water as the freezing process continues?

**Boiling Water** Prepare two data tables like the one below. (Note that you can also use Time and Temperature as column headings, to create a vertical table.) You will need to add additional cells for the time

steadily boiling.

measurements. Sample Data Table: Temperature of Water Time (s)

WRIT Temperature (°C) DO NOT Fill the beaker about one-third to one-half full with water.

Put on heat-resistant gloves. Turn on the hot plate, and put the beaker on the plate. Put the thermometer in the beaker. Use the clamp on the ring stand to hold the thermometer so that it does not touch the bottom of the beaker. CAUTION: Be careful not to touch

the hot plate. Also, be careful not to break the thermometer. In your first data table, record the temperature of the water every 30 s. Continue doing this until about one-fourth of the water boils away. Note the first temperature reading at which the water is

Turn off the hot plate. Let the beaker cool for a few minutes. Then, use heat-resistant gloves to pick up the beaker. Pour the warm water out in the sink, and rinse the warm beaker with cool water.

150

IN BOOK

180

etc

CAUTION: Even after rinsing the beaker with cool water, the beaker may still be too hot to handle without gloves.

**Key Ideas** 

> Kinetic Theory All matter is made of atoms and

States of Matter You can classify matter as a solid, a liquid, or a gas by determining whether the shape

molecules that are always in motion. (p. 77)

and volume are definite or variable. (p. 78)
 Energy's Role Because they are in motion, all particles of matter have kinetic energy. (p. 80)

> Energy and Changes of State The identity of a

can be created or destroyed. (p. 87)

points by the same amount. (p. 92)

rate remains constant. (p. 93)

directions. (p. 89)

situations. (p. 97)

force on matter. (p. 90)

**Pressure** Fluids exert pressure evenly in all

**Buoyant Force** All fluids exert an upward buoyant

**Pascal's Principle** If the pressure in a container is increased at any point, the pressure increases at all

> Fluids in Motion Fluids move faster through small areas than through larger areas, if the overall flow

> Properties of Gases Gases expand to fill their containers. They have low densities, are

compressible, and are mostly empty space. (p. 96)
 Gas Laws The gas laws will help you understand and predict the behavior of gases in specific

substance does not change during a change of state, but the energy of a substance does change. (p. 84)
 Conservation of Mass and Energy Mass and energy are both conserved. Neither mass nor energy

Section 1 Matter and Energy

Section 2 Changes of State

Section 4 Behavior of Gases

Section 3 Fluids

Key Terms fluid, p. 79

plasma, p. 79

energy, p. 80

temperature, p. 80 thermal energy, p. 81

evaporation, p. 85 sublimation, p. 85

condensation, p. 86

pressure, p. 89 pascal, p. 89

viscosity, p. 94

gas laws, p. 97

States of Matter

105

buoyant force, p. 90

