---
course_chapter: 4
chapter_title: Atoms
section: 1
section_title: The Structure of Atoms
---

# The Structure of Atoms

### Key Ideas

- What is the difference between protons, neutrons, and electrons?
- What do atoms of an element have in common with other atoms of the same element?
- Why do isotopes of the same element have different atomic masses?
- > What unit is used to express atomic mass?

### **Key Terms**

proton
neutron
atomic number
mass number\nisotope\nunified atomic
mass unit
mole

### Why It Matters

Radioisotopes emit energy when they decay. To diagnose and treat diseases, doctors use this property of radioisotopes to track where in the body certain atoms go.

Less than 100 years after Dalton published his atomic theory, scientists determined that atoms consisted of smaller particles, such as the electron. In this section, you will learn more about the particles inside the atom.

### What Is in an Atom?

Atoms are made up of various subatomic particles. To understand the chemistry of most substances, however, we need to study only three of these particles. The three main subatomic particles are distinguished by mass, charge, and location in the atom. Figure 1 compares these particles.

At the center of each atom is a small, dense *nucleus*. The nucleus is made of **protons**, which have a positive charge, and **neutrons**, which have no charge. Protons and neutrons are almost identical in size and mass. Moving around outside the nucleus is a cloud of very tiny, negatively charged *electrons*. The mass of an electron is much smaller than that of a proton or neutron.

**Figure 1 Subatomic Particles** 

| Particle | Charge | Mass (kg)                | Location in the atom |
|----------|--------|--------------------------|----------------------|
| Proton   | +1     | 1.67 × 10 <sup>-27</sup> | in the nucleus       |
| Neutron  | 0      | 1.67 × 10 <sup>-27</sup> | in the nucleus       |
| Electron | -1     | 9.11 × 10 <sup>-31</sup> | outside the nucleus  |

proton (PROH TAHN) a subatomic particle that has a positive charge and that is located in the nucleus of an atom neutron (NOO TRAHN) a subatomic particle that has no charge and that is located in the nucleus of an atom

Figure 2 Helium atoms, including the ones in this helium blimp, are made up of two protons, two neutrons, and two electrons. Which of these particles defines the element as helium?

### **Academic Vocabulary**

overall (OH vuhr AWL) total; net

### Each element has a unique number of protons.

A hydrogen atom has one proton. A helium atom, shown in **Figure 2**, has two protons. Lithium has three protons. As you move through the periodic table of the elements, this pattern continues. Each element has a unique number of protons. In fact, an element is defined by the number of protons in an atom of that element.

### Unreacted atoms have no overall charge.

Even though the protons and electrons in atoms have electric charges, most atoms do not have an <u>overall</u> charge. The reason is that most atoms have an equal number of protons and electrons, whose charges exactly cancel. For example, a helium atom has two protons and two electrons. The atom is neutral because the positive charge of the two protons exactly cancels the negative charge of the two electrons, as shown below.

Charge of two protons: +2Charge of two neutrons: 0Charge of two electrons: -2Total charge of a helium atom: 0

If an atom gains or loses electrons, it becomes charged. A charged atom is called an *ion*.

### The electric force holds the atom together.

Positive and negative charges attract each other with a force known as the *electric force*. Because protons are positive and electrons are negative, protons and electrons are attracted to one another by the electric force. In fact, the electric force between protons in the nucleus and electrons outside the nucleus holds the atom together. On a larger scale, this same force holds solid and liquid materials together. For instance, electric attractions hold water molecules together.

### **Atomic Number and Mass Number**

Atoms of different elements have their own unique structures. Because these atoms have different structures, they have different properties. Atoms of the same element can vary in structure, too. > Atoms of each element have the same number of protons, but they can have different numbers of neutrons.

### The atomic number equals the number of protons.

The **atomic number** of an element, Z, tells you how many protons are in an atom of the element. Remember that most atoms are neutral because they have an equal number of protons and electrons. Thus, the atomic number also equals the number of electrons in the atom. Because each element is defined by its unique number of protons, each element has a unique atomic number. Hydrogen has only one proton, so Z=1 for hydrogen. The largest naturally occurring element, uranium, has 92 protons, so Z=92 for uranium. The atomic number of a given element never changes.

# The mass number equals the total number of subatomic particles in the nucleus.

The **mass number** of an element, A, equals the number of protons plus the number of neutrons in an atom of the element. A fluorine atom has 9 protons and 10 neutrons, so A=19 for fluorine. Oxygen has 8 protons and 8 neutrons, so A=16 for oxygen. The mass number reflects the number of protons and neutrons (and not the number of electrons) because protons and neutrons provide most of the atom's mass. Although atoms of an element have the same atomic number, they can have different mass numbers because the number of neutrons can vary. **Figure 3** shows which subatomic particles in the nucleus of an atom contribute to the atomic number and which contribute to the mass number.

Reading Check Which defines an element: the atomic number of the element or the mass number of the element?

atomic number (uh TAHM ik NUHM buhr) the number of protons in the nucleus of an atom

mass number (MAS NUHM buhr) the sum of the numbers of protons and neutrons in the nucleus of an atom

### READING TOOLBOX

### **Pyramid FoldNote**

Create a Pyramid FoldNote for the terms *proton*, *neutron*, and *electron*, and describe which can vary for a given element. Also include the terms *atomic number* and *mass number* in your notes.

**Figure 3** Atoms of the same element have the same number of protons and thus the same atomic number. But because the number of neutrons may vary, atoms of the same element may have different mass numbers.

Quick Lab

www.scilinks.org

Topic: Isotopes

Code: HK80820

mass)

**Modeling Isotopes** 

colors to represent protons, neu-

trons, and electrons. Use tooth-

**Procedure** 

together.

tritium (A = 3).

Use gumdrops of three different

(A = 3) and helium-4 (A = 4).

from the helium isotopes?

3 Create atomic models for helium-3

**Analysis** 

compare to one another?

Isotopes of Hydrogen

Deuterium

A = 2

1. How do the isotopes of hydrogen

2. How do the hydrogen isotopes differ

picks to hold the gumdrops

2 Create atomic models for the three

isotopes of hydrogen: protium

(A = 1), deuterium (A = 2), and

Isotopes

protons but a different number of neutrons relative to other atoms of the same element. Because they have the same number of protons and electrons, isotopes of an element have the same chemical properties. However, isotopes have differ-

ent masses. > Isotopes of an element vary in mass because their numbers of neutrons differ.

isotope (IE suh TOHP) an atom that has the same number of protons (or the same has one proton and one electron. The most common hydroatomic number) as other atoms of the same element do but that has a different number

gen isotope, protium, does not have any neutrons. Because it of neutrons (and thus a different atomic has one proton in its nucleus, its mass number, *A*, is 1. Deuterium, a second isotope of hydrogen, has one neutron as

well as one proton in its nucleus. Its mass number, A, is 2. A third isotope, tritium, has two neutrons. Because its nucleus contains two neutrons and one proton, tritium has a mass number of 3.

Reading Check Which hydrogen isotope has the most mass?

Figure 4 Each isotope of hydrogen has one proton, but

the number of neutrons varies. What is the atomic number,

Protium A = 1

3. Which isotopes have the same mass number? Which isotopes have the same atomic number?

As you have learned, atoms of a single element can have different numbers of neutrons and thus different mass numbers. An **isotope** is an atom that has the same number of

Each of the three isotopes of hydrogen, shown in Figure 4,

Tritium

A = 3

122

Z, of each isotope?

Atoms

Chapter 4

### The mole is useful for counting small particles.

Because chemists often deal with large numbers of small particles, they use a large counting unit called the **mole** (mol). A mole is a collection of a very large number of particles.

1 mol = 602, 213, 670, 000, 000, 000, 000, 000 particles

Amedeo Avogadro. Why is  $6.022 \times 10^{23}$  the number of par-

of atoms in 12.00 grams of carbon-12. Experiments have

stance contains  $6.022 \times 10^{23}$  particles of that substance.

shown this value to be  $6.022 \times 10^{23}$ . So, one mole of a sub-

ticles in one mole? The mole has been defined as the number

The following example demonstrates the magnitude of

Avogadro's number:  $6.022 \times 10^{23}$  popcorn kernels would cover

the United States to form a pile about 500 km (310 mi) tall! So,

popcorn kernels but is useful for counting atoms or molecules.

Avogadro's number is not useful for counting items such as

Reading Check How many particles are in 1 mol of iron?

The mass in grams of one mole of a substance is called *molar mass*. For example, 1 mol of carbon-12 atoms has a mass of 12.00 g, so the molar mass of carbon-12 is 12.00 g/mol.

In nature, elements often occur as mixtures of isotopes. So,

a mole of an element usually contains several isotopes. As a

result, an element's molar mass in grams per mole equals its

carbon has a mass of 12.01 g. Because this mass is a weighted

average of the masses of several isotopes of carbon, it differs

from the molar mass of carbon-12, which is a single isotope.

average atomic mass in unified atomic mass units, u. The

average atomic mass of carbon is 12.01 u. So, one mole of

Moles and grams are related.

**Figure 7** shows the molar mass of magnesium.

This number is usually written as  $6.022 \times 10^{23}$  and is called *Avogadro's number*. The number is named for Italian scientist

Integrating Space Science

**Counting Stars** How many stars are in the universe? In 2003, a group of

visible universe—the portion that our

astronomers estimated that the

telescopes can reach—contains

70,000,000,000,000,000,000,000 stars, or  $7 \times 10^{22}$  stars. This quantity

is about one-tenth of Avogadro's

telescopes. As improvements in telescopes occur, the estimate could

number! Of course, this estimate is

based on observations from existing

increase. Perhaps the estimate will

reach Avogadro's number someday.

unified atomic mass unit (YOON

uh FIED uh TAHM ik MAS YOON it) a unit of mass that describes the mass of an atom

or molecule; it is exactly 1/12 the mass of a

**mole** (MOHL) the SI base unit used to measure the amount of a substance whose

number of particles is the same as the

The Structure of Atoms

125

number of atoms of carbon in exactly 12 g

carbon atom with mass number 12

(symbol, u)

of carbon-12

**Figure 7** One mole of magnesium  $(6.022 \times 10^{23} \text{ Mg atoms})$  has a mass of 24.3050 g. Note that the balance is accurate only to one-tenth of a gram,

Section 2

so it reads 24.3 g.

Magnesium 24.3050

128

