---
course_chapter: 4
chapter_title: Atoms
section: 2
section_title: Modern Atomic Theory
---

# Modern Atomic Theory

**Key Ideas** Key **Terms** Why It Matters What is the modern model of the atom? orbital Modern atomic theory explains why different valence electron How are the energy levels of an atom filled? elements produce differphoton > What makes an electron jump to a new energy level? ent colors in fireworks. alton's theory that the atom could not be split had to be modified after the discovery that atoms are made of protons, neutrons, and electrons. Like most scientific models and theories, the model of the atom has been revised many times to explain new discoveries. **Modern Models of the Atom** The modern model of the atom, which accounts for many new discoveries in the early 20th century, is very different from the model proposed by Rutherford. In the modern atomic model, electrons can be found only in certain en-Figure 1 The energy levels of an ergy levels, not between levels. Furthermore, the location atom are like the floors of the

of electrons cannot be predicted precisely. This model is not building shown here. The energy difference between energy levels as easy to visualize as the earlier models that you have studied. decreases as the energy level increases. **Electron location is limited to energy levels.** In 1913, Niels Bohr, a Danish physicist, suggested that the energy of each electron was related to the

electron's path around the nucleus. Electrons can be in 4th energy only certain energy levels. They must gain energy to level move to a higher energy level or must lose energy to 3rd energy move to a lower energy level. Bohr's description of level energy levels is still used by scientists today.

One way to imagine Bohr's model is to compare an 2nd energy level atom to the stairless building shown in Figure 1. Imagine that the nucleus is in a deep basement. The 1st energy energy levels begin on the first floor, above the basement. Electrons can be on any floor, but they cannot be

> elevator and lose energy by riding down. Chapter 4 Atoms

between floors. Electrons gain energy by riding up the

# Orbitals determine the number of electrons that each level can hold.

You have seen that each energy level contains a certain number of electrons. The orbitals in each energy level deter-

mine the total number of electrons that the level can hold, as

that this level contains four orbitals: one s orbital and three p

Total number

of orbitals

Number of electrons

8

18

32

 $\times 2 =$ 

**Figure 5** shows. For instance, you learned earlier that the second energy level can hold eight electrons. The reason is

orbitals. Because each orbital can hold two electrons, the

second energy level holds  $4 \times 2 = 8$  electrons.

Number of

orbitals by type

5

when an atom gains or loses energy.

3

**Electron Transitions** 

ground state to an excited state?

s p d

1

1 3

1 3 5

1

**Energy** 

level

2

3

4

Figure 5 Orbitals and Electrons for Energy Levels 1-4

1 = 1

1 + 3 = 4

1 + 3 + 5 = 9

1 + 3 + 5 + 7 = 16

As you have learned, the modern model of the atom limits

the location of electrons to specific energy levels. An electron is never found between these levels. Instead, it "jumps" from one level to the next. What makes an electron move from one level to another? > Electrons jump between energy levels

The lowest state of energy of an electron is called the *ground state*. At normal temperatures, most electrons are in the ground state. However, if an electron gains energy, it moves to an *excited state*. It gains energy by absorbing a par-

ticle of light, called a **photon.** The electron may then fall back

Photons of light have different energies. The energy of a

to a lower level. In doing so, the electron releases a photon.

photon determines to which level the electron will jump. Think back to the elevator analogy. When an electron absorbs a photon, it gains energy and "rides up the elevator." The energy of the photon determines the level up to which the electron rides. When the electron loses energy and "rides down the elevator," a photon is released. In this case, the change in levels determines the energy of the emitted photon. Electrons can move between any two levels of the atom.

\*\*Reading Check\*\* What makes an electron jump from the\*\*

QuickLab @20 min

Make a table that has 10 columns

and 4 rows. Label the first cell

"Energy level." Label the remaining

cells in the first row "s" (1 cell), "p" (3 cells), and "d" (5 cells). Label the

remaining cells in the first column

2 For each energy level, place an X in

3 Place **pennies** in empty cells to

can hold two "electrons."

represent electrons. Each "orbital"

Oraw Bohr models of atoms whose atomic numbers are 3, 5, 10, and 20. For each model, fill in the cells with the correct number of pennies

(in order) to see how the electrons

are located in the energy levels.

valence electron (VAY luhns ee LEK TRAHN) an electron that is found in the

determines the atom's chemical properties

photon (FOH TAHN) a unit or quantum of

outermost shell of an atom and that

Modern Atomic Theory

Section 3

131

cells that correspond to orbitals that are not found in that level.

**Electron Levels** 

"1," "2," and "3."

# Skills Practice

What You'll Do

isotopes.

periodic table

diameter (6)

diameter (4)

toothpicks (20)

134

Chapter 4

Atoms

> Build models of nuclei of certain

> Use the periodic table to determine

the composition of atomic nuclei.

What You'll Need

plastic-foam balls, blue, 2-3 cm in

plastic-foam balls, white, 2-3 cm in

**Building Isotopes** 

Imagine that you are an employee at the Elements-4-U Company, which custom builds models of elements. Your job is to construct a model of the atomic nucleus for each element ordered by your clients. You were

hired for the position because of your knowledge about what a nucleus is made of and your understanding of how isotopes of an element differ

from each other. Now, it's time to put that knowledge to work!

**Procedure Making the Simplest Nucleus** 

Copy the sample data table onto another sheet of paper. 2 Your first assignment is the nucleus of hydrogen-1. Pick up one proton (a white plastic-foam ball). Congratulations! You have built a

hydrogen-1 nucleus, the simplest nucleus possible. The atomic number of an element is the number of protons in an atom of the element. In your data table, record the atomic number and the number of neutrons for hydrogen-1.

Add the atomic number and the neutron number together to determine the mass number of hydrogen-1. Record this information in your table.

Oraw a picture of your hydrogen-1 model. **Building More-Complicated Nuclei** 

6 For the next part of the lab, you will need to use information from the periodic table of the elements. You can find the atomic number of any element at the top of the element's entry on the periodic

> table. For example, the atomic number of carbon is 6. Find the atomic number for each remaining isotope in the data table, and add this information to your table.

The name of the isotope tells you the mass number. For instance, the mass number of hydrogen-2 is 2, and the mass number of

helium-4 is 4. Determine the mass number for each remaining isotope in the data table, and add this information to your table.

3 Subtract the atomic number from the mass number to find the number of neutrons for each remaining isotope in the table.

### **Key Ideas**

# y Ideas Rey Tel

