---
course_chapter: 5
chapter_title: The Periodic Table
section: 1
section_title: Exploring the Periodic Table
---

# Standardized Test Prep

### **Understanding Concepts**

Directions (1-4): For each question, write on a sheet of paper the letter of the correct answer.

- 1. When electricity is connected to a neon sign, an atom of neon inside the sign emits a photon. What has happened within the atom to allow the emission of light energy?
  - A. An electron has moved to a lower energy level.
  - B. Two electron orbitals have collided.
  - **C.** A proton has been lost from the nucleus.
  - **D.** The atom has gained a positive charge.
- 2. After a single subatomic particle is removed from an atom of helium, the helium atom becomes an atom of hydrogen. What subatomic particle was removed?

**F.** an electron

H. a quark

**G.** a proton

L a neutron

**3.** Gold has an average atomic mass of 196.97 u. Approximately how many atoms of gold are there in 100 g of gold? Note: there are  $6.022 \times 10^{23}$  atoms in a mole.

**A.**  $3.0573 \times 10^{19}$ 

**C.**  $1.1862 \times 10^{24}$ 

**B.**  $3.0573 \times 10^{23}$ 

**D.**  $1.1862 \times 10^{28}$ 

**4.** What subatomic particles can be found in regions called *orbitals*?

F. protons

H. electrons

G. neutrons

I. photons

# *Directions* (5-6): For each question, write a short response.

- **5.** Xenon has an atomic number of 54. A particular isotope of xenon has a mass number of 131. How many protons and how many neutrons does each atom of that isotope have?
- **6.** Suppose that a team of chemists discovered that lead has the following composition: 80% of lead is an isotope whose mass number is 207, and 20% of lead is an isotope whose mass number is 208. What would they determine the average atomic mass of lead to be?

### **Reading Skills**

*Directions* (7-8): Read the passage below. Then, answer the questions that follow.

THE BOHR MODEL OF THE ATOM

In the Bohr model of the atom, electrons can be found only in certain energy levels. Electrons "jump" directly from one level to the next level; they are never found between levels. When an electron moves from one level to another, it gains or loses energy, depending on the direction of its jump.

Bohr's model explained an unusual event. When electric charges pass through atoms of a gaseous element, the gas produces a glowing light, like in a neon sign. If this light is passed through a prism, a pattern of lines appears. Each line has a different color. The pattern depends on the element—neon has one pattern, and helium has another. In Bohr's model, the lines are caused by electron jumps from higher to lower energy levels. Because only certain jumps are possible, electrons release energy only in certain quantities. These "packets" of energy produce the lines that are seen.

- **7.** In the Bohr model of the atom, which of the following characteristics of electrons is limited?
  - A. the number of electrons in an atom
  - **B.** the location of the electrons
  - **C.** the size of electrons
  - **D.** the speed of electrons
- **8.** What causes the colored lines that appear when the light from a gas is passed through a prism?
  - F. packets of energy released by electron jumps
  - **G.** electrons changing color
  - **H.** atoms of the gas exchanging electrons
  - **I.** There is not enough information to determine the answer.

**Word Parts** 

WORDS

ROOT

MEANING

SOURCE OF ROOT

**Root Words** Many scientific words are made up

parts can help you understand new scientific terms.

alkali metal

Arabic "al-qali"

in salty soil

alkali

alkaline earth metal

ashes of plants grown

Here are two examples from this chapter:

You can think of elements in these groups as

elements that are likely to be found in ashes.

Alkaline-earth metals have low solubility, so they are

more likely to be found in solid—or earthy—form.

Your Turn After you have read Section 3, look up

why you think the word halogen is appropriate for

the elements in Group 17 of the periodic table.

**Graphic Organizers** 

**Spider Maps** Spider maps show how

in turn are related to a main idea.

From the oval, draw legs. Each leg

From each leg, draw horizontal lines. Write details about each category on

oval around it.

these lines.

Chapter 5

144

details are organized into categories, which

To make a spider map, follow the steps.

Write a main topic title, and draw an

represents a category of the main topic.

The Periodic Table

the roots hal- and halo- in a dictionary. Then, explain

of word parts derived from ancient or foreign languages. Understanding the meanings of these word

These reading tools can help you learn the material in this chapter. For more information on how to use these and other tools, see **Appendix A.** 

most part.

**Generalizations** 

set or group of things (or people).

by any telltale phrases.

at room temperature.

is an exception.

in the periodic table.

or phrase in the generalization.

Your Turn As you read Section 3, use a spider map to organ-

ize the information that you learn about families of elements

Element families

**Properties of Groups** Generalizations are general statements or principles applied to a large

· Generalizations are sometimes signaled by

words such as *most, mostly,* or *generally,* or by phrases such as *in general* or *for the* 

**Example of a generalization:** 

· Most generalizations, however, are not signaled

For the most part, pure metals are solid

This example statement is a generalization because

• the statement applies to most but not all metals.

· mercury, which is a liquid at room temperature,

Your Turn As you read about the properties of

groups of elements, make a list of generalizations

that you find in the text. If there is a word or phrase

that signals the generalization, underline that word#### **Changing the Arrangement**

As scientists learned more about the structure of the atom, they improved Mendeleev's table. About 40 years after Mendeleev published his table, the English chemist Henry Moseley arranged the elements by atomic number rather than by atomic mass. As you learned earlier, an element's atomic number is the number of protons in an atom of the element. Most elements did not change their location in the table, but a few elements did. This new arrangement fixed the discrepancies with elements such as tellurium and iodine.

Today's periodic table, which includes more than 100 elements, is shown on the next two pages. The modern periodic table organizes elements by atomic number. When the elements are arranged in this way, elements that have similar properties appear at regular intervals. This principle is known as the periodic law. The periodic table in this book lists the atomic number, the symbol, the name, and the average atomic mass of each element.

#### **Academic Vocabulary**

**discrepancy** (di SKREP uhn see) disagreement or difference between apparent facts

periodic law (PIR ee AHD ik LAW) the law that states that the repeating chemical and physical properties of elements change periodically with the atomic numbers of the elements

#### The Periodic Table of the Elements

| Se                                           | ydrogen<br>emiconductors<br>so known as meta      | lloids)                                  |                                            |                                          |                                            |                                          |                                        | Group 18                               |
|----------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------|----------------------------------------|
| Al Tr                                        | kali metals<br>kaline-earth me<br>ansition metals | tals                                     | Group 13                                   | Group 14                                 | Group 15                                   | Group 16                                 | Group 17                               | 2<br><b>He</b><br>Helium<br>4.002 602  |
| Other metals  Nonmetals Halogens Noble gases |                                                   | 5<br><b>B</b><br>Boron<br>10.811         | 6<br>C<br>Carbon<br>12.0107                | 7<br><b>N</b><br>Nitrogen<br>14.0067     | 0<br>0xygen<br>15.9994                     | 9<br><b>F</b><br>Fluorine<br>18.998 4032 | 10<br><b>Ne</b><br>Neon<br>20.1797     |                                        |
| Group 10                                     | ther nonmetals  Group 11                          | Group 12                                 | 13<br><b>Al</b><br>Aluminum<br>26.981 5386 | 14<br><b>Si</b><br>Silicon<br>28.0855    | 15<br><b>P</b><br>Phosphorus<br>30.973 762 | 16<br><b>S</b><br>Sulfur<br>32.065       | 17<br><b>C1</b><br>Chlorine<br>35.453  | 18<br><b>Ar</b><br>Argon<br>39,948     |
| 28<br><b>Ni</b><br>Nickel<br>58.6934         | 29<br><b>Cu</b><br>Copper<br>63.546               | 30<br><b>Zn</b><br>Zinc<br>65.409        | 31<br><b>Ga</b><br>Gallium<br>69.723       | Gemanium<br>72.64                        | 33<br><b>As</b><br>Arsenic<br>74.921 60    | 34<br>Se<br>Selenium<br>78.96            | 35<br><b>Br</b><br>Bromine<br>79.904   | 36<br><b>Kr</b><br>Krypton<br>83.798   |
| 46 <b>Pd</b> Palladium 106.42                | 47<br><b>Ag</b><br>Silver<br>107.8682             | 48<br><b>Cd</b><br>Cadmium<br>112.411    | 49<br><b>In</b><br>Indium<br>114.818       | 50<br><b>Sn</b><br>Tin<br>118.710        | 51<br><b>Sb</b><br>Antimony<br>121.760     | 52<br><b>Te</b><br>Tellurium<br>127.60   | 53<br><b>I</b><br>lodine<br>126.904 47 | 54<br><b>Xe</b><br>Xenon<br>131.293    |
| 78<br><b>Pt</b><br>Platinum<br>195.084       | 79<br><b>Au</b><br>Gold<br>196.966 569            | 80<br><b>Hg</b><br>Mercury<br>200.59     | 81<br><b>Tl</b><br>Thallium<br>204.3833    | 82<br><b>Pb</b><br>Lead<br>207.2         | 83<br><b>Bi</b><br>Bismuth<br>208.980 40   | Polonium (209)                           | 85<br><b>At</b><br>Astatine<br>(210)   | 86 <b>Rn</b> Radon (222)               |
| Ds Darmstadtium (271)                        | Rg<br>Roentgenium<br>(272)                        | 112<br><b>Uub*</b><br>Ununbium<br>(285)  |                                            | Ununquadium (289)                        |                                            | 116 Uuh* Ununhexium (292)                |                                        |                                        |
| The discoverie                               | es of elements with                               | atomic numbers                           | 112, 114, and 116                          | have been reporte                        | d but not fully conf                       | irmed.                                   |                                        |                                        |
| 63<br><b>Eu</b><br>Europium<br>151.964       | Gadolinium                                        | 65<br><b>Tb</b><br>Terbium<br>158.925 35 | 66 <b>Dy</b> Dysprosium 162.500            | 67<br><b>Ho</b><br>Holmium<br>164.930 32 | 68<br><b>Er</b><br>Erbium<br>167.259       | 69<br><b>Tm</b><br>Thulium<br>168.934 21 | 70<br><b>Yb</b><br>Ytterbium<br>173.04 | 71<br><b>Lu</b><br>Lutetium<br>174.967 |

The atomic masses listed in this table reflect the precision of current measurements. (Each value listed in parentheses is the mass number of that radioactive element's most stable or most common isotope.)

98

Cf

Californium

(251)

99

Es

Einsteinium

(252)

100

Fm

Fermium

(257)

97

Bk

Berkelium

(247)

95

Am Americium

(243)

96

Cm

Curium

(247)

101

Md

Mendelevium

(258)

102

No

Nobelium

(259)

103

Lr

Lawrencium

(262)

Figure 3 Titanium, arsenic, and bromine are in Period 4. Which is most metallic, and which is least metallic?

**period** (PIR ee uhd) a horizontal row of elements in the periodic table

**group** (GROOP) a vertical column of elements in the periodic table; elements in a group share chemical properties

#### Elements become less metallic across each period.

Each row of the periodic table is a **period.** The periodic table, which is shown on the previous pages, has seven periods. **Figure 3** shows three elements in Period 4. As you move from left to right across a period, properties such as reactivity and conductivity change, and elements become less metallic.

#### Elements in a group have similar properties.

Each column of the periodic table is a **group.** For each group, all of the elements in that group have similar chemical properties. For example, helium and neon, in Group 18, are both unreactive elements. That is, under normal conditions, these elements do not join with atoms of other elements to form compounds.

The periodic table on the previous pages shows colorcoded categories. Many of these categories are associated with a certain group or groups. You will learn more about specific groups of elements later in this chapter.

## Section 1 Review

#### **KEY IDEAS**

- Describe how Mendeleev organized his periodic table.
- Explain why Mendeleev left a space for the unknown (at the time) element germanium in his periodic table.
- State the property used to organize elements in the modern periodic table.
- 4. Identify the following on the periodic table.
  - a. the chemical symbol for mercury
  - **b.** the period and group of gold
  - c. the atomic mass of iron
  - d. the atomic number of neon
  - e. the element represented by Cu

#### **CRITICAL THINKING**

- 5. Applying Concepts Metals conduct electricity well, while nonmetals do not. Which element should conduct electricity better: germanium, aluminum, or helium?
- **6. Drawing Conclusions** Are the properties of sodium, Na, more like the properties of lithium, Li, or magnesium, Mg? Explain your answer.
- 7. Making Inferences Before 1937, all naturally occurring elements had been discovered, but no one had found a trace of element 43. Chemists predicted the chemical properties of this element, now called technetium. How were these predictions possible? Which elements would you expect to be similar to technetium?

# **Exploring the Periodic Table**

#### Key Ideas

- Why do elements within a group of the periodic table have similar chemical properties?
- What happens to an atom that gains or loses electrons?
- What are the three main categories of elements?

#### Key **Terms**

ion metal nonmetal semiconductor

#### Why It Matters

The properties of metals make metals useful for conducting electricity. For example, wires that carry electricity are made of metal.

Why is neon an unreactive element? Why is sodium so reactive that it reacts violently with moisture and oxygen in the air? These chemical properties are related to the number of electrons in each element.

#### The Role of Electrons

The periodic table is organized by atomic number, which is the number of protons in an atom. For a neutral atom, the number of protons equals the number of electrons. The periodic trends in the periodic table are the result of electron arrangement. Specifically, the chemical properties of each group are largely determined by the number of valence electrons. These electrons are closest to the outside of the atom and are sometimes considered part of an outer "shell" of electrons.

#### Valence electrons account for similar properties.

The number of valence electrons determines many of the chemical properties of an element. The diagrams in **Figure 1** show atoms of two elements from Group 1: lithium and sodium. Because they each have one valence electron, lithium and sodium have similar chemical properties. In general, elements in a group have chemical and physical properties in common because they have the same number of valence electrons. Of course, elements in a group are not exactly alike. They differ in numbers of protons in their nuclei and in numbers of electrons in their filled inner energy levels. As a result, the properties of elements in a group are not exactly the same.

Figure 1 These two elements in Group 1 each have one valence electron. What is the difference in the location of these electrons?

# READING TOOLBOX

#### **Root Words**

Use a dictionary or the Internet to find the root words for *hydrogen*, *helium*, and *lithium*. Explain how each root is related to the properties of that element.

# An element's location in the periodic table is related to electron arrangement.

You can find out how the electrons are arranged in the atoms of an element if you know where the element is located in the periodic table. Hydrogen and helium are in Period 1.

Figure 2 shows that a hydrogen atom has one electron in an s orbital and that a helium atom has two electrons in an s orbital. Lithium is located in Period 2. Like helium, lithium has two electrons in an s orbital. But lithium has a third electron, which is in an s orbital in the second energy level. The table below shows the electron arrangement of lithium.

| Element | Energy level | Orbital | Number of electrons |
|---------|--------------|---------|---------------------|
| 1.146.1 | 1            | S       | 2                   |
| Lithium | 2            | S       | 1                   |

As you move to the right in Period 2, electrons begin to fill the p orbitals. For instance, a carbon atom's six electrons are in two s orbitals and one p orbital, as shown in the table below.

| Element | Energy level | Orbital | Number of electrons |
|---------|--------------|---------|---------------------|
|         | 1            | s       | 2                   |
| Carbon  | 2            | S       | 2                   |
|         | 2            | р       | 2                   |

A nitrogen atom has three electrons in p orbitals, an oxygen atom has four, and a fluorine atom has five. **Figure 2** shows that a neon atom has six electrons in p orbitals. Each p orbital can hold two electrons, so neon's three p orbitals are filled.

#### **Ion Formation**

Atoms whose outermost orbitals are not filled may undergo a process called *ionization*. That is, such atoms may gain or lose valence electrons so that they have a filled outermost orbital. If an atom gains or loses electrons, it no longer has an equal number of electrons and protons. Because the charges do not cancel completely, the atom has a net electric charge. A charged atom is called an ion.

ion (IE AHN) an atom, radical, or molecule that has gained or lost one or more electrons and has a negative or positive charge

#### **Group 1 elements form positive ions.**

Lithium is a Group 1 element. Lithium is reactive in air, in water, and especially in acid. The atomic structure of lithium explains lithium's reactivity. A lithium atom has three electrons, as shown in the upper left diagram in **Figure 3**. Two of these electrons occupy the first energy level in the s orbital, but only one electron occupies the second energy level. This single valence electron is easily removed, which makes lithium very reactive. Removing this electron forms a positive ion, or *cation*, as shown in the upper right diagram in **Figure 3**. A lithium ion, written as Li<sup>+</sup>, has a filled outer s orbital.

Atoms of other Group 1 elements also have one valence electron. These elements are reactive and behave similarly to lithium.

#### **Group 17 elements form negative ions.**

Like lithium, fluorine is very reactive. Each fluorine atom has nine electrons. Two of these electrons occupy the first energy level. The other seven electrons—the valence electrons—are in the second energy level. A fluorine atom needs only one more electron to have a filled outermost energy level. An atom of fluorine easily gains this electron to form a negative ion, or *anion*, as the bottom diagram in **Figure 3** shows. Because an ion of fluorine has a filled outer energy level, the ion is more stable and less reactive than a fluorine atom.

Ions of fluorine, which have a 1– charge, are called *fluoride ions*. The symbol for the fluoride ion is F<sup>-</sup>. Because atoms of other Group 17 elements have seven valence electrons, other Group 17 elements are reactive and behave like fluorine, too.

Reading Check Why do Group 1 and Group 17 elements easily form ions?

**Figure 3** The valence electron of a lithium atom may be removed to form a lithium ion, Li<sup>+</sup>, which has a 1+ charge. A fluorine atom easily gains one valence electron to form a fluoride ion, F<sup>-</sup>, which has a 1– charge.

metal (MET'I) an element that is shiny and that conducts heat and electricity well nonmetal (nahn MET'I) an element that conducts heat and electricity poorly semiconductor (SEM i kuhn DUK tuhr) an element or compound that conducts electric current better than an insulator does but not as well as a conductor does

#### **How Are Elements Classified?**

As you have learned, elements within a group have similar chemical properties. In addition to being organized into groups, the elements in the 18 groups in the periodic table are further classified into three main categories. These three categories are based on general properties that the elements in the categories have in common, as shown in Figure 4. All elements are either metals, nonmetals, or semiconductors.

#### Elements in each category have similar properties.

As shown in **Figure 4**, most elements are **metals**. Most metals are shiny solids that can be stretched and shaped. They are also good conductors of heat and electricity. Some examples of metals are gold, platinum, and copper.

**Figure 4** shows that all **nonmetals**, except for hydrogen, are found on the right side of the periodic table. Examples of nonmetals include carbon, oxygen, and helium. Nonmetals may be solids, liquids, or gases at room temperature. Solid nonmetals are often dull and brittle. They are poor conductors of heat and electricity. Materials that do not conduct heat or electricity well are sometimes called *insulators*.

Some elements can conduct electricity under certain conditions. These six elements, shown in **Figure 4**, are called **semiconductors**. Semiconductors are also sometimes called *metalloids*. Two common semiconductors are silicon and germanium. The main properties of metals, nonmetals, and semiconductors are summarized in **Figure 5** on the next page.

Reading Check Which category contains the most elements, and which category contains the fewest elements?

Figure 5 Three Categories of Elements

|            | Metals                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          | Nonmetals                                                                                                                                                                                                 | Semiconductors                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
|------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Properties | <ul> <li>Metals are good conductors of electricity.</li> <li>Metals are good conductors of heat.</li> <li>Metals are ductile (easily drawn into thin wires) and malleable (easily shaped or formed).</li> <li>Most metals are shiny.</li> </ul> | <ul> <li>Nonmetals are poor conductors of electricity.</li> <li>Nonmetals are poor conductors of heat.</li> <li>Nonmetals are not malleable or ductile.</li> <li>Most nonmetals are not shiny.</li> </ul> | <ul> <li>Semiconductors share properties with metals and nonmetals.</li> <li>Semiconductors can conduct electricity under certain conditions.</li> <li>Semiconductors are the main components of chips in computers and in other electronic devices.</li> </ul> |
| Examples   | Copper                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          | Carbon                                                                                                                                                                                                    | Tellurium                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |
|            | Lead                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            |                                                                                                                                                                                                           | Silicon                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |

# Section 2 Review

#### **KEY IDEAS**

- **1. Explain** why elements in a group on the periodic table have similar chemical properties.
- 2. Compare the number of valence electrons in an atom of oxygen, O, with the number of valence electrons in an atom of selenium, Se. Are oxygen and selenium in the same period or group?
- Explain why some atoms gain or lose electrons to form ions.
- 4. Describe why lithium and other Group 1 elements usually form positive ions, while fluorine and other Group 17 elements form negative ions.
- **5. List** the three main categories of elements, and give an example of each.

#### **CRITICAL THINKING**

- **6. Making Predictions** Predict which ions cesium forms: Cs<sup>+</sup> ions or Cs<sup>2+</sup> ions.
- **7. Drawing Conclusions** Determine whether elements that fit the following descriptions are more likely to be metals or nonmetals:
  - **a.** a shiny substance used to make flexible bed springs
  - **b.** a yellow powder from underground mines
  - c. a gas that does not react
  - **d.** a conducting material used within flexible wires
  - e. a brittle substance that does not conduct heat
- **8. Making Predictions** Predict the charge of a beryllium ion.


