---
course_chapter: 6
chapter_title: The Structure of Matter
section: 2
section_title: Ionic and Covalent Bonding
---

# Ionic and Covalent Bonding

Key **Terms** 

ionic bond

covalent bond

metallic bond

polyatomic ion

Why It **Matters** 

Chemical structure explains matter's proper-

electricity.

ties, such as why met-

als like copper conduct

ww.scilinks.org

183

Topic: Chemical Bonding

Code: HK80264

Ionic and Covalent Bonding

### **Covalent Bonds**

atoms have eight valence electrons.

atoms.

together?

7e

Chlorine atom

covalent bond (koh VAY luhnt

one or more pairs of electrons

Chlorine

gas

7e

Chlorine atom

involved in bonding.

Chapter 6

186

Figure 5 Two chlorine atoms (above) share

electrons equally to form a nonpolar covalent bond. Covalent bonds are often shown as a single line drawn between two atoms. The model at right shows that the two chlorine atoms share two electrons. Dots represent electrons that are not

The Structure of Matter

BAHND) a bond formed when atoms share

Compounds that are made of molecules, such as water and sugar, have **covalent bonds**. **> Atoms joined by covalent** 

bonds share electrons. Compounds that are networks of

bonded atoms, such as silicon dioxide, are also covalently

bonded. Covalent bonds usually form between nonmetal

Covalent compounds can be solids, liquids, or gases. Most covalent compounds that are made of molecules have low melting points—usually below 300 °C. Molecules are free to move when the compound is dissolved or melted. But most of these molecules do not conduct electricity, because they are not charged. Chlorine,  $\mathrm{Cl}_2$ , is a covalent compound that is a gas at room temperature. **Figure 5** shows how two chlorine atoms bond to form a chlorine molecule. Before bonding, each atom has seven electrons in its outermost energy level. If each atom shares one electron with the other atom, then both atoms have a full outermost energy level. That is, both

The structural formula in Figure 5 shows how the chlorine

atoms are connected in the molecule that forms. A single line

drawn between two atoms shows that the atoms share two

Reading Check What holds two covalently bonded atoms

Two of the electrons are in the shared electron cloud.

Chlorine molecule

Each chlorine atom has six

electrons that are not shared.

One covalent bond (two shared electrons)

electrons and are joined by one covalent bond.

#### **Polyatomic Ions**

Until now, we have talked about compounds that have either ionic or covalent bonds. But some compounds have both ionic and covalent bonds. Such compounds are made of **polyatomic ions**, which are groups of covalently bonded atoms that have a positive or negative charge as a group.

A polyatomic ion acts as a single unit in a compound, just as ions that consist of a single atom do.

#### There are many common polyatomic ions.

Many compounds that you use either contain or are made from polyatomic ions. For example, baking soda is a compound that has polyatomic ions. Another name for baking soda is sodium hydrogen carbonate,  $NaHCO_3$ . Hydrogen carbonate,  $HCO_3^-$ , is a polyatomic ion. Sodium carbonate,  $Na_2CO_3$ , is often used to make soaps and other cleaners. It contains the carbonate ion,  $CO_3^{2-}$ . Sodium hydroxide, NaOH, has hydroxide ions,  $OH^-$ , and is also used to make soaps. A few of these polyatomic ions are shown in **Figure 9.** 

Oppositely charged polyatomic ions, like other ions, can bond to form compounds. For example, ammonium nitrate,  $\mathrm{NH_4NO_3}$ , and ammonium sulfate,  $(\mathrm{NH_4})_2\mathrm{SO_4}$ , both contain positively charged ammonium ions,  $\mathrm{NH_4^+}$ . Ammonium nitrate contains one ammonium ion, and ammonium sulfate has two ammonium ions. Nitrate,  $\mathrm{NO_3^-}$ , and sulfate,  $\mathrm{SO_4^{2-}}$ , are both negatively charged polyatomic ions.

#### Parentheses group the atoms of a polyatomic ion.

You might be wondering why the chemical formula for ammonium sulfate is written as  $(NH_4)_2SO_4$  instead of as  $N_2H_8SO_4$ . The parentheses remind us that ammonium,  $NH_4$ , acts like a single ion. Parentheses represent the group that the atoms of the ammonium ion form. The subscript 2 outside the parentheses applies to the whole ion. Parentheses are not needed in compounds such as ammonium nitrate,  $NH_4NO_3$ , because there is only one of each ion.

Always keep in mind that a polyatomic ion's charge applies not only to the last atom in the formula but to the whole ion. For example, the 2– charge of the carbonate ion,  $CO_3^{2-}$ , applies to carbonate,  $CO_3$ , not just the oxygen atom. A polyatomic ion acts as a single unit in a compound.

Reading Check Why are parentheses used in a chemical formula for a compound that contains more than one of a particular polyatomic ion?

metallic bond (muh TAL ik BAHND) a bond formed by the attraction between positively charged metal ions and the electrons around them

polyatomic ion (PAHL ee uh TAHM ik IE ahn) an ion made of two or more

Hydroxide ion, OH

Carbonate ion, CO32

Ammonium ion, NH<sub>4</sub><sup>+</sup>

**Figure 9** The hydroxide ion, OH<sup>-</sup>, carbonate ion, CO<sup>2</sup><sub>3</sub><sup>-</sup>, and ammonium ion, NH<sup>+</sup><sub>4</sub>, are all polyatomic ions.

#### **Integrating Space Science**

**Ions and Molecules in Space** Most of the ions and molecules in space are not the same as the ions and molecules that are found on Earth or in Earth's atmosphere. C<sub>3</sub>H, C<sub>6</sub>H<sub>2</sub>, and HCO<sup>+</sup> have all been found in space. So far, no one has been able to figure out how these unusual molecules and ions form in space.

# Some names of polyatomic anions relate to the oxygen content of the anion.

You may have noticed that many polyatomic anions are made of oxygen. Most of their names end with -ite or -ate. An -ate ending is usually used to name an ion that has more oxygen atoms, while ions that have fewer oxygen atoms associated with the same positive group usually end in -ite. **Figure 10** lists several common polyatomic anions. Notice that hydroxide, OH<sup>-</sup>, is a polyatomic ion that is not named in the way that other ions that contain oxygen are named. Hydroxide and cyanide, CN<sup>-</sup>, are examples of polyatomic anions that have unique names and are not named according to any general rules.

Figure 10 Some Common Polyatomic Anions

| lon name               | lon formula                     |
|------------------------|---------------------------------|
| Acetate ion            | CH <sub>3</sub> CO <sub>2</sub> |
| Carbonate ion          | CO <sub>3</sub> <sup>2-</sup>   |
| Chlorate ion           | CIO3                            |
| Chlorite ion           | CIO <sub>2</sub>                |
| Cyanide ion            | CN-                             |
| Hydrogen carbonate ion | HCO <sub>3</sub>                |
| Hydrogen sulfate ion   | HSO <sub>4</sub>                |
| Hydrogen sulfite ion   | HS0 <sub>3</sub>                |

| lon name         | lon formula                   |
|------------------|-------------------------------|
| Hydroxide ion    | 0H-                           |
| Hypochlorite ion | CIO-                          |
| Nitrate ion      | NO <sub>3</sub>               |
| Nitrite ion      | NO <sub>2</sub>               |
| Phosphate ion    | P0 <sup>3-</sup>              |
| Phosphite ion    | P0 <sup>3-</sup>              |
| Sulfate ion      | S0 <sub>4</sub> <sup>2-</sup> |
| Sulfite ion      | S0 <sub>3</sub> <sup>2-</sup> |

## Section 2 Review

#### **KEY IDEAS**

- Determine if the following compounds are likely to have ionic or covalent bonds.
  - a. magnesium oxide, MgO
  - b. strontium chloride, SrCl<sub>2</sub>
  - c. ozone, O<sub>3</sub>
  - d. methanol, CH<sub>3</sub>OH
- 2. Draw the structural formula for acetylene, C<sub>2</sub>H<sub>2</sub>. The atoms of acetylene bond in the order HCCH. Carbon and hydrogen atoms share two electrons, and each carbon atom must have a total of four bonds. How many electrons do the carbon atoms share?
- Identify which two of the following substances will conduct electric current, and explain why.
  - a. aluminum foil
  - **b.** sugar, C<sub>12</sub>H<sub>22</sub>O<sub>11</sub>, dissolved in water
  - c. potassium hydroxide, KOH, dissolved in water

- **4. Explain** why electrons are shared equally in oxygen, O<sub>2</sub>, but not in carbon monoxide, CO.
- 5. Predict whether a silver coin can conduct electricity. What kind of bonds does silver have?
- Identify which of the bonds in calcium hydroxide, Ca(OH)<sub>2</sub>, are ionic and which are covalent.

#### **CRITICAL THINKING**

- Applying Concepts Does dinitrogen tetroxide, N<sub>2</sub>O<sub>4</sub>, have covalent or ionic bonds? Explain how you reached your conclusion.
- 8. Applying Ideas An atom of the element iodine, I, has much more attraction for electrons than an atom of strontium, Sr, does. What kind of bonds are likely to form between atoms of the two elements?
- Compare and Contrast How are metallic bonds similar to covalent bonds? How are they different?

SECTION 3

