---
course_chapter: 6
chapter_title: The Structure of Matter
section: 3
section_title: Compound Names and Formulas
---

# Compound Names and Formulas

#### Key Ideas

- > How are ionic compounds named?
- What do the numerical prefixes used in naming covalent compounds tell you?
- > What does a compound's empirical formula indicate?

#### **Key Terms**

empirical formula molecular formula

#### Why It Matters

Knowing how compounds are named can help you recognize them in food ingredients.

Just like elements, compounds have names that distinguish them from other compounds. Although the compounds BaF<sub>2</sub> and BF<sub>3</sub> may seem to have similar chemical formulas, their names make it clear that they are different. BaF<sub>2</sub> is *barium fluoride*, and BF<sub>3</sub> is *boron trifluoride*. You can see that the names of these compounds come from the elements that make up the compounds.

#### **Naming Ionic Compounds**

Ionic compounds are formed by the strong attractions between oppositely charged particles, cations (positive ions) and anions (negative ions). Both ions are important to the compound's structure, so both ions are included in the name.

The names of ionic compounds consist of the names of the ions that make up the compounds.

# Names of cations include the elements of which they are composed.

In many cases, the name of the cation is just like the name of its element. For example, when an atom of the element *sodium* loses an electron, a *sodium ion*, Na<sup>+</sup>, forms. Similarly, when a *calcium* atom loses two electrons, a *calcium ion*, Ca<sup>2+</sup>, forms. And when an *aluminum* atom loses three electrons, an *aluminum ion*, Al<sup>3+</sup>, forms. Common cations are listed in **Figure 1.** The periodic table can be used as a tool for figuring out what ions are formed by different elements. Notice that ions of Group 1 elements have a 1+ charge and that ions of Group 2 elements have a 2+ charge. In many cases, you can tell what charge an ion will have by looking at where the element is located on the periodic table.

Figure 1 Some Common Cations

| lon name and symbol             | lon charge |
|---------------------------------|------------|
| Cesium ion, Cs+                 | 1+         |
| Lithium ion, Li+                |            |
| Potassium ion, K+               |            |
| Rubidium ion, Rb+               |            |
| Sodium ion, Na+                 |            |
| Barium ion, Ba <sup>2+</sup>    | 2+         |
| Beryllium ion, Be <sup>2+</sup> |            |
| Calcium ion, Ca <sup>2+</sup>   |            |
| Magnesium ion, Mg <sup>2+</sup> |            |
| Strontium ion, Sr <sup>2+</sup> |            |
| Aluminum ion, Al <sup>3+</sup>  | 3+         |

**Figure 2 Some Common Anions** 

| Element                  | lon                           | lon<br>charge |
|--------------------------|-------------------------------|---------------|
| Fluor <del>ine,</del> F  | fluoride ion, F <sup>-</sup>  | 1–            |
| Chlor <del>ine,</del> Cl | chloride ion, Cl <sup>-</sup> | M<br>N        |
| Brom <del>ine,</del> Br  | bromide ion, Br               |               |
| lod <del>ine,</del> l    | iodide ion, l <sup>-</sup>    |               |
| 0x <del>ygen,</del> 0    | oxide ion, 0 <sup>2–</sup>    | 2–            |
| Sulf <del>ur,</del> S    | sulfide ion, S <sup>2-</sup>  |               |
| Nitr <del>ogen,</del> N  | nitride ion, N <sup>3–</sup>  | 3–            |

Figure 3 Some Transition Metal Cations

| lon name          | lon symbol       |
|-------------------|------------------|
| Copper(I) ion     | Cu+              |
| Copper(II) ion    | Cu <sup>2+</sup> |
| Iron(II) ion      | Fe <sup>2+</sup> |
| Iron(III) ion     | Fe <sup>3+</sup> |
| Nickel(II) ion    | Ni <sup>2+</sup> |
| Nickel(III) ion   | Ni <sup>3+</sup> |
| Chromium(II) ion  | Cr <sup>2+</sup> |
| Chromium(III) ion | Cr <sup>3+</sup> |
| Cadmium(II) ion   | Cd <sup>2+</sup> |
| Titanium(II) ion  | Ti <sup>2+</sup> |
| Titanium(III) ion | Ti <sup>3+</sup> |
| Titanium(IV) ion  | Ti <sup>4+</sup> |

Names of anions are altered names of elements.

An anion of an element has a name similar to that element's name. The difference is the name's ending. **Figure 2** shows how some common anions are named. Like most cations, anions of elements in the same group of the periodic table have the same charge. NaF is made of sodium ions, Na<sup>+</sup>, and fluoride ions, F<sup>-</sup>. Therefore, its name is *sodium fluoride*.

#### An ionic compound must have a total charge of zero.

If an ionic compound is made up of ions that have different charges, the ratio of ions will not be 1:1. Calcium fluoride is made of calcium ions,  $Ca^{2+}$  and fluoride ions,  $F^-$ . For calcium fluoride to have a total charge of zero, there must be two fluoride ions for every calcium ion:  $(2 \times -1) + (+2) = 0$ . So, the formula for calcium fluoride is  $CaF_2$ .

Reading Check What determines the amounts of each ion in an ionic compound?

#### Some cation names must show their charge.

Iron is a transition metal. Transition metals may form several cations—each with a different charge. A few of these cations are listed in **Figure 3.** Think about the compounds FeO and  $\operatorname{Fe_2O_3}$ . According to the rules you have learned so far, both of these compounds would be named *iron oxide*, even though they are not the same compound, as **Figure 4** shows. They are different compounds and should have different names.

The charge of the iron cation in  ${\rm Fe_2O_3}$  is different from the charge of the iron cation in FeO. In cases such as this, the cation name must be followed by a Roman numeral in parentheses. The Roman numeral shows the cation's charge.  ${\rm Fe_2O_3}$  is made of  ${\rm Fe^{3+}}$  ions, so it is named iron(III) oxide. FeO is made of  ${\rm Fe^{2+}}$  ions, so it is named iron(III) oxide.

**Figure 4** Iron can form different cations, which then form different compounds.

#### Determine the charge of a transition metal cation.

How can you tell that the iron ion in  ${\rm Fe_2O_3}$  has a charge of 3+? Three oxide ions,  ${\rm O^{2^-}}$ , have a total charge of 6-. Thus, the total positive charge in the formula must be 6+ so that the total charge can be zero. So, each of the two iron ions must have a charge of 3+.

#### Write formulas for ionic compounds using names.

You can find the charge of each ion in a compound if you are given the compound's formula. You can find the formula for a compound if you are given the compound's name.

### Math Skills Writing Ionic Formulas

What is the chemical formula for aluminum fluoride?

#### Identify

List the given and unknown values.

#### Given:

Symbol for an aluminum ion from **Figure 1:** Al<sup>3+</sup> Symbol for a fluoride ion from **Figure 2:** F

#### Unknown:

chemical formula

#### Plan

Write the symbols for the ions, with the cation first.

 $Al^{3+}F^{-}$ 

#### Solve

Find the least common multiple of the ions' charges.

Write the chemical formula. Show with subscripts the number of each ion needed to make a neutral compound. The least common multiple of 3 and 1 is 3. To make a neutral compound, you need a total of three positive charges and three negative charges. You need only one  $Al^{3+}$  ion because  $1 \times (+3) = +3$ . You need three  $F^-$  ions because  $3 \times (-1) = -3$ .  $AlF_3$ 

#### **Practice**

Write formulas for the following ionic compounds.

- 1. lithium oxide
- 2. beryllium chloride
- 3. titanium(III) nitride

For more practice, visit **go.hrw.com** and enter the keyword **HK8MP.** 

#### Practice **Hint**

Once you have determined a chemical formula, always check the formula to see if it makes a neutral compound. For this example, the aluminum ion has a charge of 3+. The fluoride ion has a charge of only 1-, but there are three of them for a total of 3-.
(3+) + (3-) = 0, so the charges balance, and the formula is neutral.

Figure 5 Prefixes Used to Name Covalent Compounds

| Number of atoms | Prefix |
|-----------------|--------|
| 1               | mono-  |
| 2               | di-    |
| 3               | tri-   |
| 4               | tetra- |
| 5               | penta- |
| 6               | hexa-  |
| 7               | hepta- |
| 8               | octa-  |
| 9               | nona-  |
| 10              | deca-  |

 $N_2O_4$ 

Dinitrogen tetroxide

**Figure 6** One molecule of diitrogen tetroxide has two nitrogen atoms and four oxygen atoms.

#### **Naming Covalent Compounds**

Covalent compounds, such as silicon dioxide, SiO<sub>2</sub> and carbon dioxide, CO<sub>2</sub>, are named using rules that are different from rules used to name ionic compounds. The main difference from ionic compounds is the use of prefixes. For covalent compounds of two elements, numerical prefixes tell how many atoms of each element are in the molecule.

# Numerical prefixes are used to name covalent compounds of two elements.

Some prefixes used in naming covalent compounds are shown in **Figure 5.** If there is only one atom of the first element, the name does not get a prefix. The element farther to the right in the periodic table is named second and ends in *-ide*.

One boron atom and three fluorine atoms make up *boron trifluoride*,  $\mathrm{BF}_3$ . *Dinitrogen tetroxide*,  $\mathrm{N_2O_4}$ , is made of two nitrogen atoms and four oxygen atoms, as **Figure 6** shows. Notice that the a in tetra is dropped to make the name easier to say.

#### **Empirical Formulas**

Emeralds, shown in **Figure 7**, are made of a mineral called beryl. The chemical formula for beryl is  $\mathrm{Be_3Al_2Si_6O_{18}}$ . But how did scientists determine this formula? It took some experiments. Chemical formulas that are unknown are determined by figuring out the mass of each element in the compound.

Once the mass of each element in a sample of the compound is known, scientists can calculate the compound's empirical formula, or simplest formula. An empirical formula tells us the smallest whole-number ratio of atoms that are in a compound.

For most ionic compounds, the empirical formula is the same as the chemical formula. Covalent compounds have empirical formulas, too. The empirical formula for water is  $\rm H_2O$ . The formula tells you that the ratio of hydrogen atoms to oxygen atoms is 2:1.

Reading Check What is an empirical formula?

**Figure 7** Emerald gemstones are cut from the mineral beryl. Very tiny amounts of chromium(III) oxide, Cr<sub>2</sub>O<sub>3</sub>, in the gemstones gives them their beautiful green color.

# Different compounds can have the same empirical formula.

Empirical formulas show only a ratio of atoms, so it is possible for different compounds to have the same empirical formula. Formaldehyde, acetic acid, and glucose all have the empirical formula  ${\rm CH_2O}$ , as **Figure 8** shows. However, these three compounds are not alike. Formaldehyde is sometimes used to keep dead organisms from decaying so that they can be studied. Acetic acid gives vinegar its sour taste and strong smell. And glucose is a sugar that plays a very important role in your body chemistry.

# Molecular formulas are determined from empirical formulas.

Formaldehyde, acetic acid, and glucose are all covalent compounds that are made of molecules. They all have the same empirical formula, but each compound has its own molecular formula. A compound's **molecular formula** tells you how many atoms are in one molecule of the compound.

As **Figure 8** shows, formaldehyde's empirical formula is the same as the molecular formula. The molecular formula for acetic acid is two times the empirical formula, and the molecular formula of glucose is six times the empirical formula.

#### Masses can be used to determine empirical formulas.

You can find the empirical formula of a compound if you know the mass of each element present in a sample of the compound. Convert the masses to moles. Then, find the molar ratio, which will give you the empirical formula.

#### **Suffixes**

Find two adjectives on this page that end in the suffix -ar. For each one, tell what noun is its root, and give the meaning of the phrase in which it appears.

**empirical formula** (em PIR i kuhl FAWR myoo luh) the composition of a compound in terms of the relative numbers and kinds of atoms in the simplest ratio

molecular formula (moh LEK yoo lur FAWR myoo luh) a chemical formula that shows the number and kinds of atoms in a molecule, but not the arrangement of atoms

Figure 8 Empirical and Molecular Formulas for Some Compounds

| Compound     | Empirical formula | Molar mass   | Molecular formula               | Structure                    |
|--------------|-------------------|--------------|---------------------------------|------------------------------|
| Formaldehyde | CH <sub>2</sub> O | 30.03 g/mol  | CH <sub>2</sub> O               | Oxygen<br>Carbon<br>Hydrogen |
| Acetic acid  | CH <sub>2</sub> O | 60.06 g/mol  | $2 \times CH_2O = C_2H_4O_2$    | 3                            |
| Glucose      | CH <sub>2</sub> O | 180.18 g/mol | $6 \times CH_2O = C_6H_{12}O_6$ |                              |

## Math Skills Finding Empirical Formulas

One mole of an unknown compound contains 62 g of phosphorus and 80 g of oxygen. What is the empirical formula of this compound?

#### Identify

List the given and unknown values.

#### Given:

62 g phosphorus, 80 g oxygen Unknown:

empirical formula

#### Practice **Hint**

An empirical formula must have whole numbers of elements. If the molar ratio of elements has a decimal in it, you will need to multiply the ratio by a whole number to make the ratio consist of only whole numbers.

$$1.5:1 \times 2 = 3:2$$

> An empirical formula must represent the simplest possible molar ratio between the elements in the compound. If a molar ratio can be reduced to a simpler fraction, divide it by a whole number.

 $10:4 \div 2 = 5:2$ 

#### Plan

Write the atomic masses.

#### phosphorus: 30.97 g/mol oxygen: 16.00 g/mol

#### Solve

The molar ratio of elements in the compound will be the compound's empirical formula.

$$\frac{62 \text{ g P} \times 1 \text{ mol P}}{30.97 \text{ g}} = \textbf{2.0} \text{ mol P}$$

$$\frac{80 \text{ g O} \times 1 \text{ mol O}}{16.00 \text{ g O}} = \textbf{5.0} \text{ mol O}$$
\nempirical formula:  $P_2O_5$ 

#### **Practice**

- 1. One mole of an unknown compound has 36.04 g of carbon and 6.04 g of hydrogen. What is the compound's empirical formula?
- 2. A sample of a compound contains 3.6 g of boron and 1.0 g of hydrogen. What is the compound's empirical formula?

For more practice, visit go.hrw.com and enter keyword HK8MP.

# Section 3 Review

#### **KEY IDEAS**

- 1. Name the following ionic compounds, and specify the charge of any transition metal cations.
  - a. Fel<sub>2</sub> **b.** MnF<sub>3</sub>
- c. CrCl<sub>2</sub>
- d. CuS
- 2. Find the charge of the cadmium cation in cadmium bromide, CdBr2. Explain your reasoning.
- **3. Name** the following covalent compounds:
  - a. SeO<sub>2</sub>
- c.  $As_2O_5$

**b.** Sil<sub>4</sub>

**d.**  $P_4S_3$ 

#### **CRITICAL THINKING**

4. Analyzing Data A mole of a certain compound contains 207.2 g of lead and 32.00 g of oxygen. Without doing any calculations, tell whether a formula unit of the compound contains more atoms of lead or more atoms of oxygen. Explain.

#### Math Skills

- 5. Determine the chemical formulas for the following ionic compounds:
  - magnesium sulfate
  - **b.** rubidium bromide
  - c. chromium(II) fluoride
  - d. nickel(I) carbonate
- 6. What is the empirical formula of a compound that contains 4.03 g of hydrogen per mole, 64.14 g of sulfur per mole, and 128.00 g of oxygen per mole?
- 7. A sample of a compound contains 160 g of oxygen and 20.2 g of hydrogen. What is the compound's empirical formula?

Key Ideas

> What is a polymer?

What is an organic compound?

used to describe a type of compound.

can also be found in organic compounds.

Figure 1 The organic compounds sorbitol and aspartame sweeten some sugarless chewing gums.

pounds. The active ingredient in aspirin is a form of the organic compound acetylsalicylic acid, CqH8O4. Sugarless chewing gum also contains organic compounds. Two of its ingredients are the sweeteners sorbitol, C6H14O6, and aspartame, C<sub>14</sub>H<sub>18</sub>N<sub>2</sub>O<sub>5</sub>, both of which are shown in **Figure 1**.

Sorbitol

Aspartame

**Organic Compounds** 

