---
course_chapter: 6
chapter_title: The Structure of Matter
section: 4
section_title: Organic and Biochemical Compounds
---

# Organic and Biochemical Compounds

**Key Terms** 

organic

What organic compounds are essential to life?

polymer

carbohydrate protein

amino acid

The word *organic* has many different meanings. Most people

compound

associate the word organic with living organisms. Perhaps you have heard of or eaten organically grown fruits or vegetables. They are grown using fertilizers and pesticides that come from plant and animal matter. In chemistry, the word organic is

An organic compound is a covalently bonded compound that contains carbon. Most organic compounds also

contain hydrogen. Oxygen, nitrogen, sulfur, and phosphorus, organic compound (awr GAN ik KAHM POWND) a covalently bonded compound that contains carbon, excluding Many ingredients of familiar substances are organic com-

carbonates and oxides

Why It Matters

Your body is made of

organic compounds,

which play important

roles in keeping you

alive.

197

Proteins are complex polymers of amino acids.

Starch is made of only glucose. **Proteins**, which provide structure and function to parts of cells, are much more com-

group (-NH<sub>2</sub>), a carboxyl group (-COOH), and a side group that gives the amino acid its unique properties. There are 20 amino acids found in naturally occurring proteins. Each

plex. Proteins are made of many different molecules that are

of amino acids. The amino acids that make up a protein

Proteins are long chains made of amino acids. A small

protein, insulin, is shown in Figure 9. Many proteins are made

of thousands of bonded amino acid molecules. Thus, millions

contain proteins, such as cheese, your digestive system breaks

of different proteins can be made. When you eat foods that

down the proteins into individual amino acids. Later, your

cells bond the amino acids in different ways to form the pro-

determine the protein's structure and function.

teins that your body needs.

Inquiry Lab

1 In one 250 mL beaker, mix 4 g

2 In a second 250 mL beaker,

100 mL and 200 mL.

borax with 100 mL water, and

mix equal parts of white glue

determine the amount of new

material made. The volume of

3 Pour the borax solution into the

diluted glue should be between

beaker containing the glue, and

stir well using a plastic spoon.

from the cup and knead it with

your fingers. You can store this new material in a plastic sand-

4 When the solution is too thick

to stir, remove the material

and water. This solution will

**Procedure** 

stir well.

wich bag.

called amino acids. Every amino acid contains an amino

a Polymer Have?

1. What happens to the new

or rolled into a ball and

3. The properties of the new

material resulted from the

material when it is stretched

2. Compare the properties of the

glue with the properties of the

bonds between the borax and

the glue particles. If too little

would the properties of the

4. Does the new material have the

properties of a polymer? Explain

new material differ?

your conclusion.

Section 4

borax were used, in what way

**Analysis** 

bounced?

new material.

protein is made of a specific combination of a certain number

Insulin Figure 9 The protein insulin

controls the use and storage of glucose in your body. Each color in the chain represents a different amino acid. Disulfide bridges between certain amino acids link different chains and provide

additional structure. ( 30 min

What Properties Does

Organic and Biochemical Compounds

203

What You'll Do

each ball bounces.

toy ball.

container, 2 L

latex, liquid

meterstick

Safety

206

Chapter 6

paper towels

water, deionized

> Synthesize two different

polymers, shape each into a ball, and measure how high

> Draw conclusions about which

polymer would make a better

What You'll Need

craft sticks, wooden (2)

ethanol solution, 50%

graduated cylinder, 10 mL

sodium silicate solution

graduated cylinder, 25 mL (2)

acetic acid solution (vinegar), 5%

cups, paper, medium-sized (2)

**Comparing Polymers** You work in the research and development lab of a toys and novelties

company. The company wants to manufacture bouncy toy balls. Such toy balls are made of polymers that bounce back after they are stretched, bent, or compressed. Your job is to review the bounce

with your gloved hands.

Trial 1

Trial 2

**Polymer** 

The Structure of Matter

Latex rubber

Ethanol-silicate

heights of the polymers and to make a recommendation about which of two polymers to use for the toy balls.

**Procedure** Prepare a data table like the sample data table shown.

**Making Latex Rubber** CAUTION: Wear goggles, gloves, and an apron. If you get a chemical on your skin or clothing, wash it off with lukewarm water while calling to

your teacher. If you get a chemical in your eyes, flush it out immediately

at the eyewash station and alert your teacher. Pour 1 L of deionized water into a 2 L container. 1 Use a 25 mL graduated cylinder to pour 10 mL of liquid latex into one of the paper cups.

Clean the graduated cylinder thoroughly with soap and water. Then, rinse it with deionized water, and use it to add 10 mL of deionized water to the cup of liquid latex. Use the same graduated cylinder to add 10 mL of acetic acid

solution to the mixture of liquid latex and water. Immediately begin stirring the mixture with a wooden craft stick. As you stir, a lump of the polymer will form around the stick.

Transfer the stick and the attached polymer to the 2 L container. While keeping the polymer underwater, gently pull it off the stick

Trial 3

DO NOT WRITE

Squeeze the polymer underwater to remove any unreacted chemicals, shape it into a ball, and remove the ball from the water.

Make the ball smooth by rolling it between your gloved hands. Set the ball on a paper towel to dry while you continue the lab.

10 Wash your gloved hands with soap and water, and then dispose of the gloves. Wash your hands again with soap and water.

Sample Data Table: Bounce Heights of Polymers Bounce height (cm) Trial 4

Trial 5 **Average** 

#### Key **Ideas**

### Section 1 Compounds and Molecules

- **Chemical Bonds** The forces that hold atoms or ions together in a compound are called *chemical bonds*. (p. 177)
- **Chemical Structure** The structure of chemical compounds can be shown by various models. (p. 178)
- **How Does Structure Affect Properties** The chemical structure of a compound determines the properties of that compound. (p. 180)

#### Key **Terms**

chemical bond, p. 177

chemical structure, p. 178

bond length, p. 178

bond angle, p. 178

## Section 2 Ionic and Covalent Bonding

- **> Why Do Chemical Bonds Form?** Atoms join to form bonds so that each atom has a stable electron configuration. (p. 183)
- > Ionic, Covalent, and Metallic Bonds Ionic bonds form between oppositely charged ions. (p. 184) Atoms joined by covalent bonds share electrons. (p. 186) Electrons in metal atoms have freedom of movement. (p. 188)
- Polyatomic Ions A polyatomic ion acts as a single unit in a compound. (p. 189)

ionic bond, p. 184 covalent bond, p. 186

metallic bond, p. 188

polyatomic ion, p. 189

## Section 3 Compound Names and Formulas

- **Naming Ionic and Covalent Compounds** The names of ionic compounds consist of the names of the ions of which the compounds are made. (p. 191) Numerical prefixes tell how many atoms of each element are in a covalent compound. (p. 194)
- **Empirical Formulas** An empirical formula tells us the smallest whole-number ratio of atoms that are in a compound. (p. 194)

empirical formula, p. 194 molecular formula, p. 195

