---
course_chapter: 7
chapter_title: Chemical Reactions
section: 1
section_title: The Nature of Chemical Reactions
---

# Standardized Test Prep

#### **Understanding Concepts**

Directions (1-4): For each question, write on a sheet of paper the letter of the correct answer.

- **1.** What causes atoms to form chemical bonds with other atoms?
  - **A.** Atoms are more stable when they give away electrons.
  - **B.** When two atoms get close together, they merge into one.
  - **C.** The interaction of valence electrons forms a more stable configuration.
  - **D.** The attraction of the nuclei for one another causes atoms to share electrons.
- **2.** How many atoms of oxygen are in one formula unit of aluminum sulfate,  $Al_2(SO_4)_3$ ?
  - **F.** 3
  - **G.** 4
  - **H.** 8
  - **I.** 12
- **3.** A nitride anion,  $N^{3-}$ , has a charge of 3–. What is the charge of a titanium cation in the compound  $Ti_3N_2$ ?
  - **A.** 2+
  - **B.** 2-
  - **C.** 3+
  - **D.** 3-
- **4.** What is the condensed structural formula for the *n*-alkane heptane, which has a molecular formula of C<sub>7</sub>H<sub>16</sub>?
  - **F.**  $C_7H_{16}$
  - G. (CH<sub>2</sub>)<sub>6</sub>CH<sub>4</sub>
  - **H.**  $C_3H_4(CH_3)_4$
  - I. CH<sub>2</sub>(CH<sub>2</sub>)<sub>5</sub>CH<sub>2</sub>

*Directions* (5): For each question, write a short response.

**5.** The difference between the three types of chemical bonds—covalent, ionic, and metallic—is what happens to valence electrons that are part of the bond. Compare the three types of bonds based on valence electrons.

#### **Reading Skills**

*Directions* (6-8): Read the passage below. Then, answer the questions that follow.

#### SPIDER SILK

Spider silk is one of the strongest known fibers. It is strong enough to support the spider and has enough elasticity to absorb the energy of the collision of a flying insect. The strength comes from the covalent bonds between units of the amino acid polymer of which spider silk, a protein, is made. The elasticity is the result of interactions between different parts of the molecule. Coils or folds in the protein expand on impact.

Spiders can make at least seven kinds of silk for different purposes by varying the amino acids that make up the silk. Scientists studying the structure of silk have identified some of the structures that account for silk's properties. They have even found ways to mimic the properties of spider silk in synthetic fibers. However, there is still much for scientists to learn from the amazing natural properties of spider silk.

- **6.** How do the various kinds of spider silk differ based on their protein structures?
- **7.** Which of the following describes the properties of spider silk?
  - A. heavy and strong
  - B. light and flimsy
  - C. strong and elastic
  - D. rigid and heavy
- **8.** Which of the following best describes what scientists have learned about spider silk?
  - **F.** All of its properties have been explained.
  - **G.** Scientists have made synthetic fibers with properties similar to spider silk.
  - **H.** All spider silk has the same chemical structure.
  - **I.** The unique properties of spider silk remain a mystery.

The Nature of

**Chemical Reactions** 

**Describing Reactions** 

**Factors Affecting** Reaction Rates

Catalysts

216

# **Chemical Reactions**

**Chapter Outline** 

**Chemical Reactions** 

**Energy and Reactions** 

**O Chemical Equations** 

**Balanced Equations and Mole Ratios** 

**10** Reaction Types **Classifying Reactions** 

**Electrons and Chemical** Reactions

**O** Reaction Rates and Equilibrium

**Equilibrium Systems** 

Why It Matters Chemical reactions are everywhere. They are especially important to living things. This

produces its own light by special chemical reactions in its cells.

sea anemone is an animal that

Key Ideas

reactions?

> When do chemical reactions take place?

If you hear the words *chemical reaction*, you might think about scientists doing experiments in laboratories. But words such as *grow*, *ripen*, *decay*, and *burn* describe chemical reactions that you see every day. Many different chemical reactions take place inside your body all of the time. The food you eat and the oxygen you breathe change form during reactions inside your body. You breathe out the carbon dioxide that is

When sugar, water, and yeast are mixed into flour to make bread dough, a chemical reaction takes place. The yeast acts on the sugar to form new substances, including carbon dioxide and lactic acid. You know that a chemical reaction has happened because lactic acid and carbon dioxide differ from sugar. > Chemical reactions occur when substances go through chemical changes to form new substances. Often,

you can tell that a chemical reaction is happening because you

Formation of a solid

are able to see changes, such as the ones in Figure 1.

> What is the role of energy in chemical

formed in these reactions into the air.

**Chemical Reactions** 

Formation of a gas

# The Nature of Chemical Reactions

Key **Terms** 

exothermic

reaction

endothermic reaction

chemical energy

reactant

product

Why It **Matters** 

that you see every

Many of the processes

day-such as the starting

of a car, the lighting of

of a piece of fruit—are chemical reactions.

Figure 1 Easily visible signs of a

Release of energy

chemical reaction include formation of a gas, formation of a

solid, and release of energy.

a match, or the ripening

