---
course_chapter: 7
chapter_title: Chemical Reactions
section: 2
section_title: Chemical Equations
---

# **Chemical Equations**

#### Key Ideas

- > What is a chemical equation?
- > What can a balanced chemical equation tell you?

#### Key **Terms**

chemical equation mole ratio

#### Why It **Matters**

Chemical reactions are more effective for making the desired products, such as medicines, if the reactants are combined in the correct ratios.

When natural gas burns, methane reacts with oxygen gas to form carbon dioxide and water. Energy is also released as heat and light. You have seen this reaction at home if your kitchen has a gas stove.

#### **Describing Reactions**

You can describe the reaction between methane and oxygen in many ways, as **Figure 1** shows. One way is to write a word equation. A word equation shows the names of the products and reactants. Another way is to use molecular models, which can be used to show how the atoms are rearranged during the reaction. The clearest way is to write a chemical equation. A chemical equation uses symbols to represent a chemical reaction and shows the relationship between the reactants and products of a reaction.

chemical equation (KEM i kuhl ee KWAY zhuhn) a representation of a chemical reaction that uses symbols to show the relationship between the reactants and the products

Figure 1 The natural gas that stoves burn is mostly made of the compound methane. Methane burns with oxygen gas to make carbon dioxide and water.

**Figure 2** This student is giving a talk on reactions that use copper. You can read the chemical equations even if you cannot read Japanese.

Figure 3 This diagram represents the balanced chemical equation discussed in the text. It shows how the atoms of each element balance. How many atoms of each element are on each side of the equation?

#### Chemical equations show products and reactants.

Look at the chemical equation below. The reactants, which are on the left side of the arrow, form the products, which are on the right side of the arrow. In a chemical equation, an arrow pointing to the right  $(\longrightarrow)$  means "yield," or "give." Chemical equations give chemists all over the world a common way to express chemical reactions, as **Figure 2** shows.

# Balanced chemical equations account for the conservation of mass.

As written, the chemical equation above just tells you what compounds are involved in the reaction. When the number of atoms of each element on the right side of the equation matches the number of atoms of each element on the left side, the chemical equation is said to be *balanced*. By accounting for each atom that reacts, a balanced equation follows the law of conservation of mass.

For some of the elements in the equation above, the numbers of atoms on each side do not match. Carbon is balanced because each side of the equation contains one carbon atom. But four hydrogen atoms are on the left, and only two are on the right. Also, two oxygen atoms are on the left, and three are on the right. This cannot be correct, because atoms cannot be created or destroyed in a chemical reaction.

A chemical equation is balanced by adding coefficients in front of one or more of the formulas. A *coefficient* is a number that shows the relative amount of a compound in a reaction. Placing a coefficient of 2 in front of the formula for water means that for each methane molecule that reacted, two water molecules were formed. Thus, all four hydrogen atoms from each methane molecule reacted. Likewise, one must place a 2 in front of the formula for oxygen, one of the reactants.

Now, for each element, the number of atoms on one side matches the number of atoms on the other side, so the equation is balanced. **Figure 3** shows how each atom is accounted for on both sides of the above balanced chemical equation.

Reading Check Why should chemical equations be balanced?

### Math Skills Balancing Chemical Equations

Write the balanced chemical equation that describes the burning of magnesium in air to form magnesium oxide.

#### Identify

List the given and unknown values.

#### Given:

Magnesium and oxygen gas are the reactants that form magnesium oxide, the product.

#### **Unknown:**

balanced chemical equation

#### Plan

Write a word equation for the reaction.

Write the chemical equation by using formulas for the elements and compounds in the word equation. magnesium + oxygen → magnesium oxide

Remember that some gaseous elements, such as oxygen, come in molecules of two atoms each. Oxygen in air is  ${\rm O}_2$ .

$$Mg + O_2 \longrightarrow MgO$$

#### Solve

Balance the equation one element at a time.

- Count the atoms of each element on each side. There are fewer oxygen atoms in the products than there are in the reactants.
- 2. To balance the oxygen atoms, place the coefficient 2 in front of MgO. But now too few magnesium atoms are in the reactants.
- 3. To balance the magnesium atoms, place the coefficient 2 in front of Mg. Now, for each element, the number of atoms on each side is the same.

# $\begin{tabular}{lll} \textbf{Reactants} & \textbf{Products} \\ Mg + O_2 & \longrightarrow & MgO \\ Mg = 1 & O = 2 & Mg = 1 & O = 1 \\ \end{tabular}$

$$\begin{tabular}{lll} \textbf{Reactants} & \textbf{Products} \\ Mg + O_2 & \longrightarrow & 2MgO \\ Mg = 1 & O = 2 & Mg = 2 & O = 2 \\ \end{tabular}$$

$$\begin{array}{ll} \textbf{Reactants} & \textbf{Products} \\ 2Mg + O_2 & \longrightarrow & 2MgO \\ Mg = 2 & O = 2 & Mg = 2 & O = 2 \end{array}$$

#### Practice **Hint**

- You cannot balance a chemical equation by changing the subscripts within a chemical formula. Changing a formula would indicate that a different substance participates in the reaction. An equation can be balanced only by putting coefficients in front of the chemical formulas.
- Sometimes, changing the coefficients to balance one element may cause another element in the equation to become unbalanced. So, check your work to ensure that all elements are balanced.

#### **Practice**

- 1. Hydrogen peroxide, H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub>, decomposes to give water and oxygen. Write a balanced equation for the decomposition reaction.
- In a double-displacement reaction, sodium sulfide, Na<sub>2</sub>S, reacts with silver nitrate, AgNO<sub>3</sub>, to form sodium nitrate, NaNO<sub>3</sub>, and silver sulfide, Ag<sub>2</sub>S. Balance this equation.

For more practice, visit go.hrw.com and enter keyword HK8MP.

## Quick Lab

## **Balancing Chemical Equations**

#### **Procedure**

- 1 Use toothpicks and gumdrops of at least three different colors (representing atoms of different elements) to make models of the reactants in each of the following chemical equations:
  - **a.**  $H_2 + Cl_2 \rightarrow HCl$
  - **b.**  $Ca + H_2O \rightarrow Ca(OH)_2 + H_2$
  - $C_2H_6 + O_2 \rightarrow CO_2 + H_2O_3$

Rearrange the "atoms" of the reactants to form the products. (You may need different proportions of some of the reactant compounds.)

#### **Analysis**

1. On the basis of your experiment with the gumdrops and toothpicks, balance each of the chemical equations shown in step 1 of the Procedure.

#### READING TOOLBOX

#### **Table Fold**

Make a Table Fold, and write the names for the parts of a chemical equation along the top row. Fill in the columns with the information that is given by each part of a chemical equation.

#### **Balanced Equations and Mole Ratios**

Other ways of looking at the amounts in a chemical reaction are shown in **Figure 4.** Notice that the numbers of magnesium and oxygen atoms in the product equal the numbers of magnesium and oxygen atoms in the reactants.

▶ A balanced equation tells you the mole ratio, or proportion of reactants and products, in a chemical reaction. The balanced equation tells you that for every 2 mol of magnesium, 1 mol of oxygen is needed. So, if you want 4 mol of magnesium to react, you will need 2 mol of oxygen. No matter how much magnesium and oxygen are combined or how the magnesium oxide is made, the balanced equation does not change. This follows *the law of definite proportions*.

A compound always contains the same elements in the same proportions regardless of how the compound is made or how much of the compound is formed.

Figure 4 Information from a Balanced Equation

| Equation:          | 2Mg                                       | + | $\mathrm{O}_2$                            | $\rightarrow$ | 2MgO                                      |
|--------------------|-------------------------------------------|---|-------------------------------------------|---------------|-------------------------------------------|
| Amount (mol)       | 2                                         |   | 1                                         | $\rightarrow$ | 2                                         |
| Molar mass (g/mol) | 24.3                                      |   | 32.0                                      | $\rightarrow$ | 40.3                                      |
| Mass calculation   | $24.3 \text{ g/mol} \times 2 \text{ mol}$ |   | $32.0 \text{ g/mol} \times 1 \text{ mol}$ | $\rightarrow$ | $40.3 \text{ g/mol} \times 2 \text{ mol}$ |
| Mass (g)           | 48.6                                      |   | 32.0                                      | $\rightarrow$ | 80.6                                      |
| Model              | 0                                         |   |                                           |               | <b>8</b>                                  |

# Mole ratios tell you the relative amounts of reactants and products.

The mole ratio of magnesium to oxygen in the reaction shown in **Figure 4** is 2:1. Thus, for every 2 mol of magnesium that reacts, 1 mol of oxygen will also react. If 4 mol of magnesium is present, 2 mol of oxygen is needed to react. This is a ratio of 4:2, which is the same as 2:1.

In the following equation for the electrolysis of water, the mole ratio for  $H_2O:H_2:O_2$ , according to the coefficients from the balanced equation, is 2:2:1.

$$2H_2O \longrightarrow 2H_2 + O_2$$

There are twice as many molecules of hydrogen gas produced in this reaction as there are molecules of oxygen gas. Thus, as **Figure 5** shows, the hydrogen gas produced in this reaction takes up twice as much space as the oxygen gas does.

#### Mole ratios can be converted to masses.

If you know the mole ratios of the substances in a reaction, you can determine the relative masses of the substances needed to react completely. Simply multiply the molecular mass of each substance by the mole ratio from the balanced equation.

For example, for the reaction shown in **Figure 4**, the molar mass of magnesium, 24.3 g/mol, is multiplied by 2 mol to get a total mass of 48.6 g for the magnesium. The molar mass of molecular oxygen, 32.0 g/mol, is multiplied by 1 mol. So, for the magnesium to react completely with oxygen, there must be 32.0 g of oxygen available for every 48.6 g of magnesium.

mole ratio (MOHL RAY shee OH) the relative number of moles of the substances required to produce a given amount of product in a chemical reaction

**Figure 5** Electrical energy causes water to decompose into oxygen (in the test tube on the left) and hydrogen (on the right).

## Section 2 Review

#### **KEY IDEAS**

 Identify which of the following is a complete and balanced chemical equation:

$$\mathbf{a.} \ \mathsf{H}_2\mathsf{O} \longrightarrow \mathsf{H}_2 + \mathsf{O}_2$$

**c.** Fe + S 
$$\rightarrow$$
 FeS

**b.** NaCl + 
$$H_2O$$

- d. CaCO<sub>z</sub>
- 2. Determine balanced chemical equations for the following chemical reactions:

**a.** 
$$KOH + HCI \longrightarrow KCI + H_2O$$

**b.** 
$$NaHCO_3 \longrightarrow H_2O + CO_2 + Na_2CO_3$$

c. 
$$Pb(NO_3)_2 + KI \rightarrow KNO_3 + Pbl_2$$

Explain why balancing an equation requires changing the coefficients in front of chemical formulas rather than the subscripts within chemical formulas. 4. Describe the information needed to calculate the mass of a reactant or product for the following balanced equation:

$$FeS + 2HCl \rightarrow H_2S + FeCl_2$$

#### **CRITICAL THINKING**

5. Applying Concepts Chlorine gas is produced by the electrolysis of sodium chloride in water in the following reaction:

$$2NaCl + 2H_2O \rightarrow Cl_2 + H_2 + 2NaOH$$

What mass of sodium chloride is needed to make 71 g of chlorine gas?

