---
course_chapter: 8
chapter_title: Solutions
section: 2
section_title: How Substances Dissolve
---

#### Water dissolves many molecular compounds.

Water has a low molecular mass. But water is a fairly dense liquid that has a high boiling point. Water has these properties because bonding occurs between water molecules. Recall that in a water molecule, the oxygen atom pulls electrons away from the hydrogen atoms. As a result, a hydrogen atom of one water molecule and the oxygen atom of another water molecule are strongly attracted to each other. This attraction forms a hydrogen bond. Hydrogen bonds pull the water molecules close together.

Water dissolves many molecular compounds, such as ethanol, vitamin C, and table sugar, as **Figure 3** shows. These compounds are polar because, like water, they have hydrogen atoms bonded to oxygen. For example, the hydroxyl, –OH, group in ethanol, CH<sub>3</sub>CH<sub>2</sub>OH, is polar. So, the negative oxygen atom of a water molecule attracts the positive hydrogen atom of an ethanol molecule. And the positive hydrogen atom of a water molecule attracts the negative oxygen atom of an ethanol molecule. The force of attraction of these hydrogen bonds helps pull an ethanol molecule into water solution.

Hydrogen bonding is important in the dissolving of other polar molecular compounds, such as sucrose,  $\rm C_{12}H_{22}O_{11}$ , as **Figure 4** shows. Water molecules form hydrogen bonds with the –OH groups in the sucrose molecule and pull the sucrose molecules away from the sugar crystal and into solution.

Reading Check Hydrogen bonding occurs between which atoms in water molecules?

Figure 4 Hydrogen bonds form between sucrose and water. Water molecules form many hydrogen bonds with the –OH groups of a sucrose molecule. These forces pull the sucrose molecule away from the sugar crystal and into solution. Do individual sucrose molecules break apart when they dissolve?

**Figure 3** As water slowly dissolves the sugar cube, streams of denser sugar solution move downward. Table sugar, or sucrose, is a molecular compound.

hydrogen bond (HIE druh juhn BAHND) the intermolecular force occurring when a hydrogen atom that is bonded to a highly electronegative atom of one molecule is attracted to two unshared electrons of another molecule

**Figure 5** Nonpolar substances, such as oil-based paint, must be dissolved by a similar solvent. For this reason, a nonpolar solvent must be used.

example end and

#### **Academic Vocabulary**

distribute (di STRIB yoot) to spread out

nonpolar (nahn POH luhr) describes a

molecule in which the centers of positive

and negative charges are not separated

#### Like dissolves like.

A rule in chemistry is that "like dissolves like." This rule means that a solvent will dissolve substances that have molecular structures that are like the solvent's structure. For example, water is a polar molecule—it has a partially positive end and a partially negative end. So, water dissolves ions, which have charges, and other polar molecules.

Nonpolar compounds usually will not dissolve in water. Nonpolar molecules do not have partially negative and positive parts because the electrons are <u>distributed</u> evenly over the whole molecule. For example, olive oil, which is a mixture of nonpolar compounds, will not dissolve in water. The attraction between water and nonpolar molecules is less than the attraction between the nonpolar molecules. Nonpolar solvents must be used to dissolve nonpolar materials, as **Figure 5** shows. Nonpolar solvents are often distilled from petroleum.

# Inquiry**Lab**

# What Will Dissolve a Nonpolar Substance?

#### **Procedure**

- Dip a cotton swab in tincture of iodine, and make two small spots on the palm of your hand. Let the spots dry. The spots that remain are iodine.
- 2 Dip a second cotton swab in water, and wash one of the iodine spots with it. What happens to the iodine spot?
- 3 Dip a **third cotton swab** in **ethanol**, and wash the other iodine spot with it. What happens to the iodine spot?

#### **Analysis**

- Did water or did ethanol dissolve the iodine spot better?
- 2. Is water more polar or less polar than ethanol? Explain your reasoning.

#### **The Dissolving Process**

The kinetic theory of matter states that molecules are always moving. When sugar is poured into a glass of water, water molecules collide with and transfer energy to the sugar molecules at the surface of the sugar crystal. > The energy transferred from the solvent to the solute, as well as the attractive forces between the solvent and solute molecules, causes molecules at the surface of the crystal to dissolve.

Every time that sugar molecules break away from the surface of the crystal, the sugar molecules in the layer below are exposed to the solvent. Sugar molecules keep breaking away from the surface until the crystal completely dissolves.

#### Solutes with a larger surface area dissolve faster.

Small pieces of a solid dissolve faster than large pieces of the same substance. Smaller pieces have more surface area that is in contact with the solute molecules. As a result, there are more collisions between the solvent and solute molecules. So, the solid dissolves faster.

As **Figure 6** shows, breaking a solid into many smaller pieces increases the total exposed surface area. If a cube is 1 cm on each edge, each face of the cube has an area of 1 cm<sup>2</sup>. A cube has six surfaces, so the total surface area is 6 cm<sup>2</sup>. If the large cube is cut into 1,000 cubes that are 0.1 cm on each edge, the face of each small cube has an area of 0.1 cm  $\times$  0.1 cm = 0.01 cm<sup>2</sup>. So, each cube has a surface area of 0.06 cm<sup>2</sup>. The total surface area of all the small cubes is 1,000  $\times$  0.06 cm<sup>2</sup> = 60 cm<sup>2</sup>, which is 10 times the surface area of the large cube.

**Reading Check** Why does increasing the surface area of a solid help it dissolve faster?

#### READING TOOLBOX

#### **Summarizing Ideas**

As you read about the dissolving process, summarize the ways in which you can make a solute dissolve faster.

#### Stirring or shaking helps solids dissolve faster.

If you pour table sugar into a glass of water and let the glass sit, the sugar will take a long time to dissolve completely. The solid sugar is at the bottom of the glass surrounded by dissolved sugar molecules, as **Figure 7** shows. Because the dissolved sugar molecules are always moving, they will slowly *diffuse*, or spread out, throughout the solution. Until they diffuse, the dissolved sugar molecules will be near the surface of the crystal. These dissolved molecules keep water molecules from reaching the undissolved sugar. So, the molecules still in crystal will dissolve slowly.

Stirring or shaking the solution moves the dissolved sugar away from the sugar crystals. So, more water molecules can interact with the solid, also shown in **Figure 7**, and the sugar crystals dissolve faster.

#### Solids dissolve faster when the solvent is hot.

Solid solutes dissolve faster in a hot solvent than in a cold solvent. The kinetic theory states that when matter is heated, its particles move faster. As a result of heating, particles of solvent run into undissolved solute more often. These collisions also transfer more energy than collisions that occur when the solvent is cold. The greater frequency and energy of the collisions help "knock" undissolved solute particles away from each other and spread them throughout the solution.

Figure 8 shows the three ways to make solids dissolve faster.

If the solution is not stirred, crystals of sugar become surrounded by dissolved sugar molecules, which prevent water molecules from reaching the undissolved sugar.

**Figure 8** Crushing the solute, mixing the solution, or heating the solution will speed up the dissolving process.

#### Solutes affect the physical properties of a solution.

The boiling point of pure water is 100 °C and the freezing point is 0 °C. But if you dissolve 12 g of sodium chloride in 100 mL of water, you will find that the boiling point of the solution is increased to about 102 °C. Also, the freezing point of the solution will be lowered to about –8 °C. Many solutes increase the boiling point of a solution above that of the pure solvent. These same solutes also lower the freezing point of the solution below that of the pure solvent. The amount that the boiling point increases or the freezing point decreases depends on how many solute particles are in the solution.

The effect of a solute on freezing point and boiling point can be useful. For example, a car's cooling system often contains a mixture that is 50% water and 50% ethylene glycol, a type of alcohol. This solution acts as antifreeze in cold weather because its freezing point is about –30 °C. The solution also helps prevent boiling in hot weather because its boiling point is about 109 °C.

## Section 2 Review

#### **KEY IDEAS**

- Explain why water can dissolve some ionic compounds, such as ammonium chloride, NH<sub>4</sub>Cl, as well as some molecular compounds, such as methanol.
- **2. Describe** three methods that you could use to make a spoonful of salt dissolve faster in water.

#### **CRITICAL THINKING**

- Recognizing Relationships Describe the relationship of attractive forces between molecules and the ability of a solvent to dissolve a substance.
- 4. Predicting Outcomes Use the rule of "like dissolves like" to predict whether the polar molecular compound glycerol is soluble in water.
- Applying Ideas Explain why large crystals of coarse sea salt take longer than crystals of fine table salt to dissolve in water.
- 6. Explaining Events You make strawberry-flavored drink from water, sugar, and drink mix. You decide to freeze the mixture into ice cubes. You place an ice-cube tray filled with the drink and another tray of plain water in the freezer. Two hours later, you find that the water has frozen but the fruit drink has not. How can you explain this result?

replacement blood. This replacement blood comes from either the patient or a blood donor.

Blood donation has declined in recent years, so many communities have severe blood shortages.

For several years, sick or injured dogs have

For several years, sick or injured dogs have received transfusions of a new blood substitute. Someday, blood substitutes could save human lives by easing blood shortages. They could also help people who have rare blood types and When an animal or human is injured and loses blood, the number of red blood cells in the body drops. Because red blood cells are responsible for transporting oxygen in the body, a shortage of red blood cells can cause the body's tissues to be

other conditions that make traditional blood

transfusions difficult.

274

Chapter 8

Solutions

hemoglobin, the protein in red blood cells that carries oxygen throughout the body. The artificial blood given to dogs is made from hemoglobin recycled from slaughtered cows. Because this hemoglobin lacks the complex, natural covering normally present

by the dog's body in less than a day.

Donated blood is screened, tracked, and stored for transfusions. Donated blood lasts only a few weeks in stor-

> year. Artificial blood based on freefloating hemoglobin is being tested for use in human trauma patients.

age. Artificial blood can last for a

starved for oxygen. The artificial blood now avail-

able for injured dogs replaces the animals' natural

in red blood cells, the hemoglobin is often absorbed

