---
course_chapter: 8
chapter_title: Solutions
section: 3
section_title: Solubility and Concentration
---

#### Different substances have different solubilities.

The solubilities of closely related compounds can vary greatly. Compare the solubilities of the ionic compounds in **Figure 2.** Notice that all of the compounds that contain sodium also contain one other element. But sodium iodide is much more soluble than either sodium chloride or sodium fluoride.

The solubility of any substance in water depends on the strength of the forces acting between the solute particles and the strength of the forces acting between water molecules and solute particles. So, in a highly soluble substance, the forces between the solute particles are weaker than the forces between the water molecules and the solute particles. In sodium iodide, the forces between the sodium ions and iodide ions in the sodium iodide crystals are much weaker than the forces between the water molecules and the sodium and iodide ions. So, sodium iodide is more soluble than many other compounds that also contain sodium.

Reading Check Why is sodium iodide so soluble?

#### How much of a substance is in a solution?

Not all solutions have all of the solute that can be dissolved. How would you compare a solution made with one teaspoon of salt with one made with one tablespoon of salt?

Because the amount of a substance that is dissolved in solution can vary greatly, the amount of solute that is dissolved in a given solution must be specified. A solution may be described as *weak* if only a small amount of solute is dissolved or as *strong* if a large amount of solute is dissolved. However, *weak* and *strong* do not mean the same thing to everyone. For example, the sulfuric acid solution found in automobile batteries can injure the skin. So, most people would describe the solution as strong. But a chemist knows that much stronger solutions of sulfuric acid can be prepared.

The concentration of a solution is not given by the terms weak and strong. Concentration is the quantity of solute that is dissolved in a given volume of solution. A chemist would describe battery acid as having a specific concentration value. A concentrated solution has a large amount of solute. A dilute solution has only a small amount of solute. However, because the terms concentrated and dilute are not quantitative, they do not give any information about the actual amount of solute in a solution.

Figure 2 Solubilities of Some Ionic Compounds in Water

| Substance        | Formula           | Solubility in<br>g/100 g H <sub>2</sub> 0<br>at 20 °C |
|------------------|-------------------|-------------------------------------------------------|
| Calcium chloride | CaCl <sub>2</sub> | 75                                                    |
| Calcium fluoride | CaF <sub>2</sub>  | 0.0015                                                |
| Calcium sulfate  | CaSO <sub>4</sub> | 0.32                                                  |
| Iron(II) sulfide | FeS               | 0.0006                                                |
| Silver chloride  | AgCl              | 0.000 19                                              |
| Silver nitrate   | AgNO <sub>3</sub> | 216                                                   |
| Sodium chloride  | NaCl              | 35.9                                                  |
| Sodium fluoride  | NaF               | 4.06                                                  |
| Sodium iodide    | Nal               | 178                                                   |
| Sodium sulfide   | Na <sub>2</sub> S | 26.3                                                  |

**solubility** (SAHL yoo BIL uh tee) the ability of one substance to dissolve in another at a given temperature and pressure

#### concentration

(KAHN suhn TRAY shuhn) the amount of a particular substance in a given quantity of a mixture, solution, or ore

#### **Academic Vocabulary**

**maximum** (MAKS i muhm) the greatest quantity possible

saturated solution (SACH uh RAYT id suh LOO shuhn) a solution that cannot dissolve any more solute under the given conditions

#### unsaturated solution

(uhn SACH uh RAYT id suh LOO shuhn) a solution that contains less solute than a saturated solution does and that is able to dissolve additional solute

#### supersaturated solution

(soo puhr SACH uh RAYT id suh LOO shuhn) a solution that holds more dissolved solute than is required to reach equilibrium at a given temperature

#### **Saturated Solutions**

The solubility of a substance is how much of that substance will dissolve in a given amount of water at a certain temperature and pressure. When you have added the <a href="maximum">maximum</a> amount of solute that will dissolve in a solution, you have made a <a href="saturated solution">saturated solution</a>. No more solute will dissolve. In a saturated solution, the dissolved solute is in equilibrium with undissolved solute. So, if you add more solute, it just settles to the bottom of the container. To be in equilibrium means that the dissolved solute settles out of solution at the same rate that the undissolved solute dissolves.

#### Unsaturated solutions can become saturated.

Compare the two solutions shown in Figure 3. One has a white solid at the bottom, and one does not. The unsaturated solution of sodium acetate contains less than the maximum amount of solute that will dissolve in the solvent. If you keep adding sodium acetate to the solution, the compound dissolves until the solution becomes saturated. So, the solution will not have solid at the bottom. A solution is unsaturated as long as more solute can dissolve in it. The saturated solution in Figure 3 has solid sodium acetate at the bottom of the beaker. No matter how much you stir, no more sodium acetate will dissolve in this saturated solution. The undissolved solid particles will sink to the bottom of the solution.

Reading Check What happens when you add more solute to a saturated solution?

**Figure 3** Concentration and the Dissolving Process

**Unsaturated Solution** When more sodium acetate is added to this unsaturated solution, it can dissolve.

**Saturated Solution** No more sodium acetate will dissolve in this saturated solution. Any additional sodium acetate that is dissolved causes an equal amount to settle out of the solution.

#### Heating a saturated solution can dissolve more solute.

The solubility of most solutes increases as the temperature of the solution increases. If you heat a saturated solution of sodium acetate, more sodium acetate can dissolve until the solution becomes saturated at the higher temperature.

When the temperature of the sodium acetate solution decreases, sodium acetate crystals do not re-form. The excess solute needs a surface on which to crystallize. This solution now holds more solute than it normally would at the cooler temperature, so it is a **supersaturated solution**. Adding a small crystal of sodium acetate causes the solute to crystallize until the solution is once again saturated, as **Figure 4** shows.

#### Temperature and pressure affect the solubility of gases.

Soda contains carbon dioxide gas dissolved in water. Unlike solids, gases are less soluble in warmer water. So, warm soda goes flat more quickly than cold soda.

The solubility of gases also depends on pressure, as shown in **Figure 5.** Carbon dioxide is dissolved in the soda under high pressure when the bottle is sealed. When the bottle is opened, the gas pressure decreases to atmospheric pressure and the soda fizzes as the carbon dioxide comes out of solution.

Gas solubility affects scuba divers. Increased pressure underwater causes more nitrogen gas to dissolve in the blood. If the diver returns to the surface too quickly, nitrogen comes out of solution and forms bubbles in blood vessels. This condition, called the *bends*, is very painful and dangerous.

**Figure 4** Adding a single crystal of sodium acetate to a supersaturated solution causes the excess sodium acetate to quickly crystallize out of the solution.

#### **Summarizing Ideas**

Make notes about saturated solutions by summarizing the content under the red and blue headings on these two pages.

Figure 5 Effect of Gas Pressure on Gas Solubility in Water

**Higher Pressure** The pressure inside this bottle is higher than the pressure outside the bottle. Carbon dioxide gas is dissolved in water in this unopened bottle of soda.

Lower Pressure When the bottle is opened, the pressure inside the bottle decreases. Carbon dioxide gas then forms bubbles as it comes out of solution. Will more bubbles come out of a warm soda or a cold soda?

molarity (moh LA ruh tee) a concentration unit of a solution expressed in moles of solute dissolved per liter of solution

#### **Concentration of Solutions**

The terms concentrated, dilute, saturated, and unsaturated do not reveal the quantity of dissolved solute. For example, 0.173 g of calcium hydroxide will dissolve in 100 g of water. This solution is saturated but is still dilute because so little solute is present. Scientists express the quantity of solute in a solution in several ways. • One of the most common ways of expressing the concentration of a solution is molarity.

Molarity is expressed as moles of solute per liter of solution.

$$molarity = \frac{moles\ of\ solute}{liters\ of\ solution}, \text{or}\ M = \frac{mol}{L}$$

A 1.0 M, which is read as "one molar," solution of NaCl contains 1.0 mol of dissolved NaCl in every 1.0 L of solution.

### Math Skills Molarity

Calculate the molarity of sucrose,  $C_{12}H_{22}O_{11}$ , in a solution of 124 g of solute in 0.500 L of solution.

| List the given and unknown values.                                                                    | Given: $ mass \ of \ sucrose = 124 \ g $ $ volume \ of \ solution = 0.500 \ L $ Unknown: $ molarity, \ amount \ of \ C_{12}H_{22}O_{11} \ in $ $ 1 \ L \ of \ solution $                                                                                                                                                                     |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Plan Write the equation for moles C <sub>12</sub> H <sub>22</sub> O <sub>11</sub> and molarity.       | $\begin{aligned} & \textit{moles} \ C_{12} H_{22} O_{11} = \frac{\textit{mass} \ C_{12} H_{22} O_{11}}{\textit{molar mass} \ C_{12} H_{22} O_{11}} \\ & \textit{molarity} = \frac{\textit{moles} \ C_{12} H_{22} O_{11}}{\textit{liters of solution}} \end{aligned}$                                                                         |
| Find the number of moles of C <sub>12</sub> H <sub>22</sub> O <sub>11</sub> , and calculate molarity. | $\begin{aligned} & \textit{molar mass }  C_{12} H_{22} O_{11} = 342  \text{g} \\ & \textit{moles }  C_{12} H_{22} O_{11} = \frac{124  \text{g}}{342  \text{g/mol}} = 0.362  \text{mol} \\ & \textit{molarity of solution} = \\ & \frac{0.362  \text{mole }  C_{12} H_{22} O_{11}}{0.500  \text{L solution}} = 0.724  \text{M} \end{aligned}$ |

#### Practice **Hint**

- When calculating molarity, remember that molarity is moles of solute per liter of solution, not moles per liter of solvent.
- Problem 2: If volume is given in milliliters, you must multiply by 1 L/1,000 mL to change milliliters to liters.

#### **Practice**

- 1. What is the molarity of 2 mol of calcium chloride, CaCl<sub>2</sub>, dissolved in 1 L of solution?
- 2. What is the molarity of 525 g of lead(II) nitrate, Pb(NO<sub>3</sub>)<sub>2</sub>, dissolved in 1,250 mL of solution?

For more practice, visit go.hrw.com and enter keyword HK8MP.

exposure to too much fluoride damages tooth

water is very small and is measured in parts per million (ppm). The amount of fluoride in most drinking water is about 1.0 ppm, or 1.0 g of fluoride per 1,000,000 g water. So, 1.0 L of water contains

> A limited range of fluoride concentra-

tion-0.7 ppm to 1.2 ppm-is best for

helping prevent cavi-

ties. In many places

below 0.7 ppm, fluo-

ride is added to the

where the fluoride

concentration is

water supply.

Well

Municipal (natural

fluoride source)

**Fluoride Concentration and Water Source** 

Municipal (no fluoride added)

Fluoride concentration (ppm)

Section 3 Review

1. Compare the solubility of olive oil and acetic acid in

2. **Describe** how a saturated solution can become

**3. Express** the molarity of a solution that contains

0.5 mol of calcium acetate per 1.0 L of solution.

4. Understanding Relationships Explain how a solu-

tion can be both saturated and dilute at the same

5. Drawing Conclusions Determine whether sweat would evaporate more quickly if the humidity were 92% or 37%. (Hint: When the humidity is 100%, the

air is saturated with dissolved water vapor.)

time. Use an example from Figure 2.

water. Why is one substance more soluble than the

about 1 mg of fluoride.

Spring

Municipal

**KEY IDEAS** 

supersaturated.

**CRITICAL THINKING** 

(fluoride added)

YOUR

saturated, or supersaturated.

they form?

Math Skills

Section 3

450.0 mL of solution.

**ONLINE RESEARCH** 

**6. Designing Experiments** Propose a way to determine whether a saltwater solution is unsaturated,

7. Applying Ideas When you fill a glass with cold water from a faucet and then let the glass sit undis-

turbed for two hours, you will see small bubbles

**8.** Calculate the molarity of a solution that contains

35.0 g of barium chloride, BaCl2, dissolved in

Solubility and Concentration

281

sticking to the glass. What are the bubbles? Why did

1. Find out if fluoride is added to

your water supply and what

the concentration of fluoride

in your drinking water is.

# Making Pie Graphs

yellow gold alloy. Show these data in a pie graph.

The data are already in

numbers add up to 100%.

Silver is the smallest section.

The size for the gold section is  $360^{\circ} \times 0.58 = 210^{\circ}$ .

Sizes for the other sections

Draw a line from the center

an angle from that line (210°

The labels in the gold section are "Gold" and "58%."

for gold). Repeat for each

to the edge of the circle. Measure the first section as

are silver = 14°; copper = 110°; and zinc =  $26^\circ$ .

percentages, and the

A circle about 3 cm in

enough.

section.

diameter should be large

**Problem** 

Solution

graph.

by 360°.

Practice

White Gold Alloy

Metal

Copper

Nickel

Zinc

Chapter 8

284

Make sure that all of the

parts are given. Calculate

percentages if necessary.

enough that you can see

each section of the pie

Determine the size of each

pie wedge. Multiply the percentage of each metal

Use a protractor to draw

Label each section with

the name of the category and the percentage.

Use the graph above to answer question 1.

1. What is the second most abundant metal by

Use the table below to answer questions 2-5.

Solutions

Weight (%)

40

38

12

10

Percentage Composition by Weight of a 9-Karat

weight in the 14-karat gold alloy?

a different color.

the sections in the circle.

Color in each section with

Draw a circle that is large

Science Skills

**Technology** 

Percentage Composition by Weight

Weight (%)

58

31

7.1

39

of a 14-Karat Yellow Gold Alloy

Math Often used in jewelry, 14-karat gold is an alloy that contains 58% **Scientific Methods** gold by weight. The table below gives the composition of a 14-karat Graphing

Metal

Gold

Zinc

Silver

Copper

Silver 3.9%

2. The 9-karat gold is less expensive than the 14karat gold. Create a pie graph that shows the

composition of a 9-karat white gold alloy.

14-karat yellow gold alloy?

9-karat white gold alloy?

yellow gold?

3. How does the amount of gold in the 9-karat white

gold alloy compare to the amount of gold in the

4. What is the most abundant metal by weight in the

5. Which metal in the yellow gold is not in the white

gold? Which metal in the white gold is not in the

Copper

#### **EXPLAINING KEY IDEAS**

- 17. Why does stirring a solution help the solute dissolve faster?
- **18.** Explain why water dissolves many ionic compounds.

**INTERPRETING GRAPHICS** The graph below shows how the solubilities of cadmium selenate, CdSeO<sub>4</sub>, and cobalt(II) chloride, CoCl<sub>2</sub>, vary with temperature. Use the graph to answer questions 19 and 20.

- 19. At what temperature is the solubility of CdSeO<sub>4</sub> equal to 40 g CdSeO<sub>4</sub>/100 g H<sub>2</sub>O?
- 20. Which substance has an unusual solubility trend? How is the trend unusual?

#### CRITICAL THINKING

- 21. Designing Experiments Sea water is a solution that contains many types of dissolved ions. What is the simplest way to get a clear sea-water solution from a mixture that also contains mud and sand? Explain your answer.
- **22. Drawing Conclusions** Use the observations in the table below to decide whether each mixture is a solution, a suspension, or a colloid.

| Sample | Clarity | Settles<br>out | Scatters<br>light |
|--------|---------|----------------|-------------------|
| 1      | clear   | no             | yes               |
| 2      | clear   | no             | no                |
| 3      | cloudy  | yes            | yes               |
| 4      | cloudy  | no             | yes               |

#### **Graphing Skills**

23. Constructing Graphs The solubility of silver nitrate, AgNO<sub>3</sub>, in water at various temperatures is given in the table below.

| Temperature (°C) | Solubility of AgNO <sub>3</sub> in g AgNO <sub>3</sub> /100 g H <sub>2</sub> O |
|------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| 0                | 122                                                                            |
| 20               | 216                                                                            |
| 40               | 311                                                                            |
| 60               | 440                                                                            |
| 80               | 585                                                                            |

Make a graph of the solubility of  $AgNO_3$ . Plot temperature on the *x*-axis, and plot solubility on the *y*-axis. Answer the following questions.

- a. How does the solubility of AgNO<sub>3</sub> vary with the temperature of water?
- **b.** Estimate the solubility of AgNO<sub>3</sub> at 35 °C, at 55 °C, and at 75 °C.
- c. At what temperature would the solubility of AgNO<sub>3</sub> be 512 g per 100 g H<sub>2</sub>O?
- **d.** Is a solution that contains 100 g AgNO<sub>3</sub> dissolved in 100 g H<sub>2</sub>O at 10 °C saturated?

#### Math Skills

- 24. Molarity How many moles of lithium chloride, LiCl, are dissolved in 3.00 L of a 0.200 M solution of lithium chloride?
- 25. Molarity What is the molarity of 250 mL of a solution that contains 12.5 g of zinc bromide, ZnBr<sub>2</sub>?
- 26. Solubility The solubility of sodium fluoride, NaF, is 4.06 g NaF/100 g H<sub>2</sub>O at 20 °C. What mass of NaF would you have to dissolve in 1,000 g H<sub>2</sub>O to make a saturated solution?
- 27. Solubility The solubility of copper(II) chloride, CuCl<sub>2</sub>, at 20 °C is 73 g/100 g H<sub>2</sub>O. Suppose that you add 50 g CuCl<sub>2</sub> to 50 g of water at 20 °C and stir until no more CuCl<sub>2</sub> dissolves. What mass of CuCl<sub>2</sub> remains undissolved at 20 °C?

