---
course_chapter: ph01
chapter_title: Motion
section: 2
section_title: Acceleration
source: Physical Science-Textbook-2008_part_3.md (lines 1684–1951)
---

# Acceleration

#### **Key Ideas**

- > What changes when an object accelerates?
- ➤ How do you calculate the acceleration of an object moving in a straight line?
- How can a graph be used to find acceleration?

#### **Key Terms**

acceleration

#### Why It Matters

Acceleration is calculated by reconstructionists investigating automobile accidents.

I magine that you are a race-car driver. You push on the accelerator. The car goes forward, moving faster and faster. As you come up to a curve in the track, you remove your foot from the accelerator to make the turn. In both situations, your velocity changes. When you increase speed, your velocity changes. Your velocity also changes if you decrease speed or if your motion changes direction.

#### **Acceleration and Motion**

Recall that velocity has both a speed and a direction. Like velocity, *acceleration* has a value and a direction. **>** When an **object undergoes acceleration**, its velocity changes. Positive acceleration is in the same direction as the motion and increases velocity.

#### Acceleration can be a change in speed.

Suppose you start moving south on your bicycle and speed up as you go, as shown in **Figure 1.** Every second, your velocity increases by 1 m/s. After 1 s, your velocity is 1 m/s south. After 2 s, your velocity is 2 m/s south. Your velocity after 5 s is 5 m/s south. Your acceleration can be stated as an increase of one meter per second per second (1 m/s/s) or  $1 \text{ m/s}^2$  south.

**acceleration** (ak SEL uhr AY shuhn) the rate at which velocity changes over time; an object accelerates if its speed, direction, or both change

Figure 1 You are accelerating whenever your speed changes. This cyclist's speed increases by 1 m/s every second. How much does his speed change in 5 s?

**Figure 2** These skaters accelerate when changing direction, even if their speed does not change.

#### Acceleration can also be a change in direction.

Besides being a change in speed, acceleration can be a change in direction. The skaters in **Figure 2** are accelerating because they are changing direction. Why is changing direction considered to be an acceleration? Acceleration is defined as the rate at which velocity changes with time. Velocity includes both speed and direction, so an object accelerates if its speed, direction, or both change. This idea leads to the strange but correct conclusion that you can constantly accelerate while never speeding up or slowing down.

#### Uniform circular motion has centripetal acceleration.

If you move at a constant speed in a circle, even though your speed is never changing, your direction is always changing. So, you are always accelerating. The moon is constantly accelerating in its orbit around Earth. A motorcyclist who rides around the inside of a large barrel is constantly accelerating. When you ride a Ferris wheel at an amusement park, you are accelerating. All these examples have one thing in common—change in direction as the cause of acceleration.

Are you surprised to find out that as you stand still on Earth's surface, you are accelerating? You are not changing speed, but you are moving in a circle as Earth revolves. An object moving in a circular motion is always changing its direction. As a result, its velocity is always changing, even if its speed does not change. The acceleration that occurs in circular motion is known as *centripetal acceleration*. Another example of centripetal acceleration is shown in **Figure 3**.

Reading Check Describe the motion of a person who is standing still on Earth's surface.

**Figure 3** The blades of these windmills are constantly changing direction as they travel in a circle, so centripetal acceleration is occurring.

#### **Integrating Mathematics**

In the 17th century, both Sir Isaac Newton and Gottfried Leibniz studied acceleration and other rates of change. Independently, each created calculus, a branch of mathematics that allows for describing rates of change of a quantity such as velocity.

#### **Calculating Acceleration**

To find the acceleration of an object moving in a straight line, you need to measure the object's velocity at different times.  $\rightharpoonup$  The average acceleration over a given time interval can be calculated by dividing the change in the object's velocity by the time over which the change occurs. The change in an object's velocity is symbolized by  $\Delta v$ .

Average acceleration (for straight-line motion)

$$acceleration = \frac{final\ velocity - initial\ velocity}{a = \frac{\Delta v}{t}}$$

If the acceleration is small, the velocity is increasing very gradually. If the acceleration is large, the velocity is increasing more rapidly. A person can accelerate at about  $2 \text{ m/s}^2$ , whereas a sports car can accelerate at  $7.2 \text{ m/s}^2$ .

In this book, for straight-line motion, a positive acceleration always means that the object's velocity is increasing—the object is speeding up. Negative acceleration means that the object's velocity is decreasing—the object is slowing down.

#### Acceleration is the rate at which velocity changes.

The person in **Figure 4** is slowing down on a bicycle. He starts at a speed of 5.5 m/s and slows to 1.0 m/s over a time of 3.0 s. The change in speed,  $\Delta \nu$ , is 1.0 m/s – 5.5 m/s = –4.5 m/s. The change in speed is negative because he is slowing down. The equation above can be used to find average acceleration:

$$a = \frac{1.0 \text{ m/s} - 5.5 \text{ m/s}}{3.0 \text{ s}} = -1.5 \text{ m/s}^2$$

In science, acceleration describes any change in velocity, not just "speeding up." When you slow down, your acceleration is negative because it is opposite the direction of motion.

Reading Check How can you tell if an object is speeding up or slowing down?

**Figure 4** Average acceleration can be calculated when you know the initial speed, final speed, and the time over which the acceleration takes place.

#### Acceleration is negative when slowing down.

When the driver pushes on the gas pedal in a car, the car speeds up. The acceleration is in the direction of the motion and therefore is positive. When the driver pushes on the brake pedal, the acceleration is opposite the direction of motion. The car slows down, and its acceleration is negative. When the driver turns the steering wheel, the velocity changes because the car is changing direction.

#### Math Skills Acceleration

A flowerpot falls off a second-story windowsill. The flowerpot starts from rest and hits the sidewalk 1.5 s later with a velocity of 14.7 m/s. Find the average acceleration of the flowerpot.

|   | e | ٠., | 44 | L |   |
|---|---|-----|----|---|---|
| а | ρ | 1   | ш  | т | v |
|   |   |     |    |   |   |

List the given and unknown values.

#### Given:

time,  $t=1.5~\mathrm{s}$  initial velocity,  $v_\mathrm{i}=0~\mathrm{m/s}$  final velocity,  $v_\mathrm{f}=14.7~\mathrm{m/s}$  down

**Unknown:** 

acceleration,  $a = ? \text{ m/s}^2$  (and direction)

#### Plan

Write the equation for acceleration.

$$acceleration = \frac{\textit{final velocity} - \textit{initial velocity}}{v_f - v_i} \\ a = \frac{v_f - v_i}{t}$$

#### Solve

Insert the known values into the equation, and solve.

$$a = \frac{v_f - v_i}{t} = \frac{14.7 \text{ m/s} - 0 \text{ m/s}}{1.5 \text{ s}}$$
$$a = \frac{14.7 \text{ m/s}}{1.5 \text{ s}} = 9.8 \text{ m/s}^2 \text{ down}$$

#### **Practice**

- 1. Natalie accelerates her skateboard along a straight path from 0 m/s to 4.0 m/s in 2.5 s. Find her average acceleration.
- 2. A turtle swimming in a straight line toward shore has a speed of 0.50 m/s. After 4.0 s, its speed is 0.80 m/s. What is the turtle's average acceleration?
- **3.** Find the average acceleration of a northbound subway train that slows down from 12 m/s to 9.6 m/s in 0.8 s.
- **4.** Mai's car accelerates at an average rate of 2.6 m/s<sup>2</sup>. How long will it take her car to speed up from 24.6 m/s to 26.8 m/s?
- 5. A cyclist travels at a constant velocity of 4.5 m/s westward and then speeds up with a steady acceleration of 2.3 m/s². Calculate the cyclist's speed after accelerating for 5.0 s.

For more practice, visit go.hrw.com and enter keyword HK8MP.

#### Practice **Hint**

When a problem asks you to calculate acceleration, you can use the acceleration equation.

$$a = \frac{\Delta v}{t}$$

To solve for other variables, rearrange it as follows.

Problem 4: To isolate t, first multiply both sides by t.

$$a \times t = \frac{\Delta v}{t} \times t$$
$$\Delta v = at$$

Next, divide both sides by a.

$$\frac{\Delta v}{a} = \frac{at}{a}$$
$$t = \frac{\Delta v}{a}$$

Problem 5: Rearrange the acceleration equation to isolate final velocity.

$$v_{\rm f} = v_{\rm i} + at$$

Words are not the only way to

show how the graph is used to

describe space and time.

constant (KAHN stuhnt) a quantity whose

**Speed Vs. Time** 

B

30

50

Motion

60

20

Chapter 11

25

20

(s/m) 15 10

5

0 0

**376** 

10

Academic Vocabulary

value does not change

describe space and time. Redraw

#### **Graphing Accelerated Motion**

You have learned that an object's speed can be determined from a distance vs. time graph of its motion. You can also find

Graphing Skills Graphing Acceleration

20 m/s. The next point is t = 20 s and

acceleration by making a speed vs. time graph. Plot speed on the vertical axis and time on the horizontal axis. one of the graphs in this section to A straight line on a speed vs. time graph means that the speed changes by the same amount over each time interval. This is called *constant acceleration*. The slope of a straight line on a speed vs. time graph is equal to the acceleration.

You can look at a speed vs. time graph and easily see if an object is speeding up or slowing down. A line with a positive slope represents an object that is speeding up. A line with a negative slope represents an object that is slowing down.

A bus traveling on a straight road at 20 m/s uniformly slows to a stop over 20 s. The bus remains stopped for 20 s, then accelerates at a rate of 1.5 m/s<sup>2</sup> for 10 s, and then continues at a constant speed. Graph speed vs. time for 60 s. What is the bus's final speed?

The *x*-axis will indicate time, *t*, measured Determine the x-axis and in s. The y-axis will indicate speed,  $v_{i}$ the y-axis of your graph. measured in m/s. Starting from the origin, **A.** The bus begins at t = 0 s and v =

graph each section of

the motion. v = 0 m/s. Connect these points. **B.** Draw a horizontal line from t = 20 s to t = 40 s at v = 0 m/s. **C.** Starting at t = 40 s and v = 0 m/s, draw a line with a slope of  $1.5 \text{ m/s}^2$ .

**D.** Draw a horizontal line from t = 50 s to t = 60 s at v = 15 m/s. At time, t = 60 s, the speed is 3 Read the graph to

find the final speed. 15 m/s. **Practice** 

1. A car accelerates from a stop at a rate of 2 m/s<sup>2</sup> for 20 s, then continues at a constant speed for 40 s. Graph the speed vs. time of the car. What is the car's speed at 10 s? What is its final speed? 2. A train traveling at 30 m/s takes 60 s to slow to a complete stop.

the track. Graph the speed vs. time of the train for 80 s. What is the slope of the graph at 30 s?

Assume that the train's acceleration is constant as it moves down

2 Investigators calculate the coefficient of friction between the road surface and the tires. This coefficient depends on the type of tire and road conditions.

The skid distance and

the coefficient of fric-

tion are then used to

calculate the speed of

the car at the time of

the wreck.

#### **Accelerometers**

Investigators use a device called an *accelerometer* to measure acceleration. The investigator sets up conditions like those during the accident, using a similar vehicle and road surface. The coefficient of friction depends on many factors, such as the weight of the vehicle, the type of tires, and the condition

of the road—whether wet, dry, or icy. The accelerometer results are used to estimate the coefficient of friction between the road surface and the tires.

#### **Event Data Recorders**

Some auto makers are now installing devices called *Event Data Recorders* (EDRs) in cars. EDRs in automobiles are similar to the "black boxes" in airplanes. EDRs measure the change in

speed over time during a crash.
In other words, they
measure acceleration.
EDRs are especially\nuseful in situations in
which the change\nin speed is hard
to estimate with
traditional
techniques.

In other words, they
measure acceleration.

Emergency
power supply

Operating
button

# YOUR

#### TURN UNDERSTANDING CONCEPTS

 As soon as the brakes are applied, a car begins to slow down. Although the car's speed is decreasing, this is still an example of acceleration. Explain why.

#### **CRITICAL THINKING**

**2.** Why is it important to collect forensic evidence and witness accounts as soon as possible after an accident?

