---
chapter: 11
chapter_title: Water
section: 3
section_title: Water Pollution
---
# **SECTION 3 Water Pollution**

#### **Objectives**

- Compare point-source pollution and nonpoint-source pollution.
- Classify water pollutants by five types.
- Explain why groundwater pollution is difficult to clean.
- Describe the major sources of ocean pollution, and explain the effects of pollution on ecosystems.
- Describe six major laws designed to improve water quality in the United States.

#### **Key Terms**

**water pollution point-source pollution nonpoint-source pollution wastewater artificial eutrophication thermal pollution biomagnification**

**Figure 15** Point-source pollution comes from a single, easily identifiable source. In this photo, the waste from an iron mine is being stored in a pond.

#### **Table 3** -

#### **Sources of Point Pollution**

- leaking septic-tank systems
- leaking storage lagoons for polluted waste
- unlined landfills
- leaking underground storage tanks that contain chemicals or fuels such as gasoline
- polluted water from abandoned and active mines
- water discharged by industries
- public and industrial wastewater treatment plants

You might think that you can tell if a body of water is polluted by the way that the water looks or smells, but sometimes you can't. There are many different forms of water pollution. is the introduction of chemical, physical, or biological agents into water that degrade water quality and adversely affect the organisms that depend on the water. Almost all of the ways that we use water contribute to water pollution. However, the two underlying causes of water pollution are industrialization and rapid human population growth. **pollution Water**

In the last 30 years, developed countries have made great strides in cleaning up many polluted water supplies. Despite this progress, some water is still dangerously polluted in the United States and in other countries. In developing parts of the world, water pollution is a big problem. Industry is usually not the major cause of water pollution in developing countries. Often, the only water available for drinking in these countries is polluted with sewage and agricultural runoff, which can spread waterborne diseases. To prevent water pollution, people must understand where pollutants come from. As you will learn, water pollution comes from two types of sources: point and nonpoint sources.

# **Point-Source Pollution**

When you think of water pollution, you probably think of a single source, such as a factory, a wastewater treatment plant, or a leaking oil tanker. These are all examples of which is pollution discharged from a single source. **Table 3** lists some additional examples of point-source pollution. Point-source pollution can often be identified and traced to a source. But even when the source of pollution is known, enforcing cleanup is sometimes difficult. **point-source pollution,**

# **Nonpoint-Source Pollution**

comes from many different sources that are often difficult to identify. For example, a river can be polluted by runoff from any of the land in its watershed. If a farm, a road, or any other land surface in a watershed is polluted, runoff from a rainstorm can carry the pollution into a nearby river, stream, or lake. **Figure 16** shows common sources of nonpoint pollutants. **Table 4** lists some additional causes of nonpoint pollution. **Nonpoint-source pollution**

Because nonpoint pollutants can enter bodies of water in many different ways, they are extremely difficult to regulate and control. The accumulation of small amounts of water pollution from many sources is a major pollution problem—96 percent of the polluted bodies of water in the United States were contaminated by nonpoint sources. Controlling nonpoint-source pollution depends to a great extent on public awareness of the effects of activities such as spraying lawn chemicals and using storm drains to dispose of used motor oil.

**Copyright© by Holt, Rinehart and Winston. All rights reserved.**

**Identifying Sources of Pollution** Walk around your neighborhood, and record potential sources of nonpoint pollution. See Table 4 for examples. Count the number of potential sources of nonpoint pollution, and suggest ways to reduce each source of pollution in your *EcoLog.*

#### **Table 4** -

#### **Nonpoint Sources of Pollution**

- chemicals added to road surfaces (salt and other de-icing agents)
- water runoff from city and suburban streets that may contain oil, gasoline, animal feces, and litter
- pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizer from residential lawns, golf courses, and farmland
- feces and agricultural chemicals from livestock feedlots
- precipitation containing air pollutants
- soil runoff from farms and construction sites
- oil and gasoline from personal watercraft

#### **Figure 16 Sources of Nonpoint Pollution** Examples of nonpointsource pollution include livestock polluting water holes that can flow into streams and reservoirs, oil on a street, which can wash into storm sewers and then drain into waterways, and thousands of watercraft, which can leak gasoline and oil.

**Table 5** -

| Pollutant Types and Sources |                                                                                                                |                                                                                                                                                                                                |  |
|-----------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--|
| Type of pollutant           | Agent                                                                                                          | Major sources                                                                                                                                                                                  |  |
| Pathogens                   | disease-causing organisms, such<br>as bacteria, viruses, protozoa, and<br>parasitic worms                      | mostly nonpoint sources; sewage or animal<br>feces, livestock feedlots, and poultry farms;<br>sewage from overburdened wastewater<br>treatment plants                                          |  |
| Organic matter              | animal and plant matter remains,<br>feces, food waste, and debris from<br>food-processing plants               | mostly nonpoint sources                                                                                                                                                                        |  |
| Organic chemicals           | pesticides, fertilizers, plastics,<br>detergents, gasoline and oil, and<br>other materials made from petroleum | mostly nonpoint sources; farms, lawns, golf<br>courses, roads, wastewater, unlined landfills,<br>and leaking underground storage tanks                                                         |  |
| Inorganic chemicals         | acids, bases, salts, and industrial<br>chemicals                                                               | point sources and nonpoint sources;<br>industrial waste, road surfaces, wastewater,<br>and polluted precipitation                                                                              |  |
| Heavy metals                | lead, mercury, cadmium, and arsenic                                                                            | point sources and nonpoint sources;<br>industrial discharge, unlined landfills, some<br>household chemicals, and mining processes;<br>heavy metals also occur naturally in some<br>groundwater |  |
| Physical agents             | heat and suspended solids                                                                                      | point sources and nonpoint sources; heat<br>from industrial processes and suspended<br>solids from soil erosion                                                                                |  |

## **Principal Water Pollutants**

There are many different kinds of water pollutants. **Table 5** lists some common types of pollutants and some of the possible sources of each pollutant.

### **Wastewater**

Do you know where water goes after it flows down the drain in a sink? The water usually flows through a series of sewage pipes that carry it—and all the other wastewater in your community to a wastewater treatment plant. is water that contains waste from homes or industry. At a wastewater treatment plant, water is filtered and treated to make the water clean enough to return to a river or lake. **Wastewater**

**Treating Wastewater** A typical residential wastewater treatment process is illustrated in **Figure 17.** Most of the wastewater from homes contains biodegradable material that can be broken down by living organisms. For example, wastewater from toilets and kitchen sinks contains animal and plant wastes, paper, and soap, all of which

are biodegradable. But wastewater treatment plants may not remove all of the harmful substances in water. Some household and industrial wastewater and some storm-water runoff contains toxic substances that cannot be removed by the standard treatment.

**Sewage Sludge** If you look again at **Figure 17,** you will see that one of the products of wastewater treatment is *sewage sludge,* the solid material that remains after treatment. When sludge contains dangerous concentrations of toxic chemicals, it must be disposed of as hazardous waste. The sludge is often incinerated, and then the ash is buried in a secure landfill. Sludge can be an expensive burden to towns and cities because the volume of sludge that has to be disposed of every year is enormous.

The problem of sludge disposal has prompted many communities to look for new uses for this waste. If the toxicity of sludge can be reduced to safe levels, sludge can be used as a fertilizer. In another process, sludge is combined with clay to make bricks that can be used in buildings. In the future, industries will probably find other creative ways to use sludge.

# **Connection to History**

*Cryptosporidium* **Outbreak** In 1993, a pathogen called *Cryptosporidium parvum* contaminated the municipal water supply of Milwaukee, Wisconsin. The waterborne parasite caused more than 100 deaths, and 400,000 people experienced a flulike illness. *Cryptosporidium* is found in animal feces, but the parasite usually occurs in low levels in water supplies. The outbreak in Milwaukee was probably caused by an unusual combination of heavy rainfall and agricultural runoff that overburdened the city's water treatment plants.

**Figure 17 Wastewater Treatment Process**

# **QuickLAB**

#### **Measuring Dissolved Oxygen**

#### **Procedure**

- 1. Start with **three water samples,** each in a **plastic jar** that is 3 ⁄4 full. Two water samples should be tap water from a faucet without an aerator. One sample should be water that has been boiled and allowed to cool.
- 2. Using a **dissolved-oxygen test kit,** test the boiled water and one other water sample.
- 3. Tighten the lid on the third sample, and then vigorously shake the sample for one minute. Unscrew the lid, and then recap the jar.
- 4. Repeat step 3 twice. Then, uncap the jar quickly, and test the sample.

#### **Analysis**

- 1. Which sample had the highest dissolved oxygen level? Which sample had the lowest level?
- 2. What effects do rapids and waterfalls have on the levels of dissolved oxygen in a stream? What effect does thermal pollution have?

# **Artificial Eutrophication**

Most nutrients in water come from organic matter, such as leaves and animal waste, that is broken down into mineral nutrients by decomposers such as bacteria and fungi. Nutrients are an essential part of any aquatic ecosystem, but an overabundance of nutrients can disrupt an ecosystem. When lakes and slow-moving streams contain an abundance of nutrients, they are eutrophic (yoo TROH fik).

Eutrophication is a natural process. When organic matter builds up in a body of water, it will begin to decay and decompose. The process of decomposition uses up oxygen. As oxygen levels decrease, the types of organisms that live in the water change over time. For example, as a body of water becomes eutrophic, plants take root in the nutrient-rich sediment at the bottom. As more plants grow, the shallow waters begin to fill in. Eventually, the body of water becomes a swamp or marsh.

The natural process of eutrophication is accelerated when inorganic plant nutrients, such as phosphorus and nitrogen, enter the water from sewage and fertilizer runoff. Eutrophication caused by humans is called Fertilizer from farms, lawns, and gardens is the largest source of nutrients that cause artificial eutrophication. Phosphates in some laundry and dishwashing detergents are another major cause of eutrophication. Phosphorus is a plant nutrient that can cause the excessive growth of algae. In bodies of water polluted by phosphorus, algae can form large floating mats, called *algal blooms,* as shown in **Figure 18.** As the algae die and decompose, most of the dissolved oxygen is used and fish and other organisms suffocate in the oxygen-depleted water. **artificial eutrophication.**

# **Thermal Pollution**

If you look at **Figure 19,** you might assume that a toxic chemical caused the massive fish kill in the photo. But the fish were not killed by a chemical spill—they died because of thermal pollution. When the temperature of a body of water, such as a lake or stream, increases, can result. Thermal pollution can occur when power plants and other industries use water in their cooling systems and then discharge the warm water into a lake or river. **thermal pollution**

Thermal pollution can cause large fish kills if the discharged water is too warm for the fish to survive. But most thermal pollution is more subtle. If the temperature of a body of water rises even a few degrees, the amount of oxygen the water can hold decreases significantly. As oxygen levels drop, aquatic organisms may suffocate and die. If the flow of warm water into a lake or stream is constant, it may cause the total disruption of an aquatic ecosystem.

### **Groundwater Pollution**

Pollutants usually enter groundwater when polluted surface water percolates down from the Earth's surface. Any pollution of the surface water in an area can affect the groundwater. Pesticides, herbicides, chemical fertilizers, and petroleum products are common groundwater pollutants. Leaking underground storage tanks are another major source of groundwater pollution. It is estimated that there are millions of underground storage tanks in the United States. Most of the tanks—located beneath gas stations, farms, and homes—hold petroleum products, such as gasoline and heating fuel. As underground storage tanks age, they may develop leaks, which allow pollutants to seep into the groundwater.

**Figure 19** Fish kills, such as this one in Brazil, can result from thermal pollution.

# **Connection to Chemistry**

**Dissolved Oxygen** One of the most important measures of the health of a body of water is the amount of dissolved oxygen in the water. Gaseous oxygen enters water by diffusion from the surrounding air, as a byproduct of photosynthesis, and as a result of the rapid movement (aeration) of water. The amount of oxygen that water can hold is determined by the water's temperature, pressure, and salinity. Slow-moving waters tend to have low levels of dissolved oxygen, while rapidly flowing streams have higher levels. Artificial eutrophication and thermal pollution also reduce levels of dissolved oxygen. When dissolved oxygen levels remain below 1 to 2 mg/L for several hours, fish and other organisms suffocate, and massive fish kills can result.

# MATHPRACTICE

**Parts per Million** Water contamination is often measured in parts per million (ppm). If the concentration of a pollutant is 5 ppm, there are 5 parts of the pollutant in 1 million parts of water. If the concentration of gasoline is 3 ppm in 650,000 L of water, how many liters of gasoline are in the water?

**Figure 20** This diagram shows some of the major sources of groundwater pollution. Runoff and percolation transport contaminants

The location of aging underground storage tanks is not always known, so the tanks often cannot be repaired or replaced until after they have leaked enough pollutants to be located. Modern underground storage tanks are contained in concrete and have many features to prevent leaks. Other sources of groundwater pollution include septic tanks, unlined landfills, and industrial wastewater lagoons, as shown in **Figure 20.**

**Cleaning Up Groundwater Pollution** Groundwater pollution is one of the most challenging environmental problems that the world faces. Even if groundwater pollution could be stopped tomorrow, some groundwater would remain polluted for generations to come. As you have learned, groundwater recharges very slowly. The process for some aquifers to recycle water and purge contaminants can take hundreds or thousands of years. Groundwater is also difficult to decontaminate because the water is dispersed throughout large areas of rock and sand. Pollution can cling to the materials that make up an aquifer, so even if all of the water in an aquifer were pumped out and replaced with clean water, the groundwater could still become polluted.

**Figure 21 Major North American Oil Spills**

# **Ocean Pollution**

Although oceans are the largest bodies of water on Earth, they are still vulnerable to pollution. Pollutants are often dumped directly into the oceans. For example, ships can legally dump wastewater and garbage overboard in some parts of the ocean. But at least 85 percent of ocean pollution—including pollutants such as oil, toxic wastes, and medical wastes—comes from activities on land. If polluted runoff enters rivers, for example, the rivers may carry the polluted water to the ocean. Most activities that pollute oceans occur near the coasts, where much of the world's human population lives. As you might imagine, sensitive coastal ecosystems, such as coral reefs, estuaries, and coastal marshes, are the most affected by pollution.

**Oil Spills** Ocean water is also polluted by accidental oil spills. Disasters such as the 1989 *Exxon Valdez* oil spill in Prince William Sound, Alaska, make front-page news around the world. In 2001, a fuel-oil spill off the coast of the Galápagos Islands captured public attention. Each year, approximately 37 million gallons of oil from tanker accidents are spilled into the oceans. **Figure 21** shows some of the major oil spills that occurred off the coast of North America in the last 30 years.

Such oil spills have dramatic effects, but they are responsible for only about 5 percent of oil pollution in the oceans. Most of the oil that pollutes the oceans comes from cities and towns. Every year, as many as 200 million to 300 million gallons of oil enter the ocean from nonpoint sources on land. That's almost 10 times the amount of oil spilled by tankers. In fact, in one year, the road runoff from a coastal city of 5 million people could contain as much oil as a tanker spill does. Limiting these nonpoint sources of oil pollution would go a long way toward keeping the oceans clean.

**Cruise Ship Discharges** In one year, ships dump almost 7 billion kilograms of trash into the ocean. About 75 percent of all ship waste comes from cruise ships. According to most international law, cruise ships are allowed to dump nonplastic waste—including untreated sewage—into the ocean. Increasing public pressure has begun to cause the cruise-ship industry to change this practice, however.

**Figure 22** The accumulation of pollutants at successive levels of the food chain is called biomagnification.

**Figure 23** The Cuyahoga River was so polluted with petroleum and petroleum byproducts that it caught on fire and burned in 1969.

# **Water Pollution and Ecosystems**

Water pollution can cause immediate damage to an ecosystem. For example, toxic chemicals spilled directly into a river can kill nearly all living things for miles downstream. But the effects of water pollution can be even more far reaching. Many pollutants accumulate in the environment because they do not decompose quickly. As the pollutant levels increase, they can threaten an entire ecosystem.

Consider a river ecosystem. Soil tainted with pesticides washes into the river and settles to the river bottom. Some of the pesticides enter the bodies of tiny, bottom-dwelling organisms, such as insect larvae and crustaceans. A hundred of these organisms are eaten by one small fish. A hundred of these small fish are eaten by one big fish. A predatory bird, such as an eagle, eats 10 big fish. Each organism stores the pesticide in its tissues, so at each step along the food chain, the amount of the pesticide passed on to the next organism increases. This accumulation of pollutants at successive levels of the food chain is called Biomagnification, which is illustrated in **Figure 22,** has alarming consequences for organisms at the top of the food chain. Biomagnification is one reason why many U.S. states limit the amount of fish that people can eat from certain bodies of water. **biomagnification.**

# **Cleaning Up Water Pollution**

In 1969, the Cuyahoga River in Cleveland, Ohio, was so polluted that the river caught on fire and burned for several days, as shown in **Figure 23.** This shocking event was a major factor in the passage of the Clean Water Act of 1972. The stated purpose of the act was to "restore and maintain the chemical, physical, and biological integrity of the nation's waters." The goal of the act was to make all surface water clean enough for fishing and

> swimming by 1983. This goal was not achieved; however, much progress has been made since the act was passed. The percentage of lakes and rivers that are fit for swimming and fishing has increased by about 30 percent, and many states have passed stricter water-quality standards of their own. Many toxic metals are now removed from wastewater before the water is discharged.

> The Clean Water Act opened the door for other water-quality legislation, some of which is described in **Table 6.** For example, the Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act of 1972 strengthened the laws against ocean dumping.

The Oil Pollution Act of 1990 requires all oil tankers traveling in U.S. waters to

#### **Federal Laws Designed to Improve Water Quality in the United States**

**1972 Clean Water Act (CWA)** The CWA set a national goal of making all natural surface water fit for fishing and swimming by 1983 and banned pollutant discharge into surface water after 1985. The act also required that metals be removed from wastewater.

**1972 Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act, amended 1988** This act empowered the EPA to control the dumping of sewage wastes and toxic chemicals in U.S. waters.

**1975 Safe Drinking Water Act (SDWA), amended 1996** This act introduced programs to protect groundwater and surface water from pollution. The act emphasized sound science and risk-based standards for water quality. The act also empowered communities in the protection of source water, strengthened public right-to-know laws, and provided water system infrastructure assistance.

**1980 Comprehensive Environmental Response Compensation and Liability Act (CERCLA)** This act is also known as the Superfund Act. The act makes owners, operators, and customers of hazardous waste sites responsible for the cleanup of the sites. The act has reduced the pollution of groundwater by toxic substances leached from hazardous waste dumps.

**1987 Water Quality Act** This act was written to support state and local efforts to clean polluted runoff. It also established loan funds to pay for new wastewater treatment plants and created programs to protect major estuaries.

**1990 Oil Pollution Act** This act attempts to protect U.S. waterways from oil pollution by requiring that oil tankers in U.S. waters be double-hulled by 2015.

have double hulls by 2015 as an added protection against oil spills. Legislation has improved water quality in the United States, but the cooperation of individuals, businesses, and the government will be essential to maintaining a clean water supply in the future.

# **FIELD ACTIVITY FIELD ACTIVITY**

**Coastal Cleanups** You can be a part of a coastal cleanup. Every September, people from all over the world set aside one day to help clean up debris from beaches. You can join this international effort by writing to The Center for Marine Conservation.

If you do participate in a coastal cleanup, keep a record of the types of trash you find in your *EcoLog.*

# **SECTION 3 Review**

- **1. Explain** why point-source pollution is easier to control than nonpoint-source pollution.
- **2. List** the major types of water pollutants. Suggest ways to reduce the levels of each type of pollutant in a water supply.
- **3. Describe** the unique problems of cleaning up groundwater pollution.
- **4. Describe** the source of most ocean pollution. Is it point-source pollution or nonpoint-source pollution?

#### **CRITICAL THINKING**

- **5. Interpreting Graphics** Read the description of biomagnification. Draw a diagram that shows the biomagnification of a pollutant in an ecosystem. READING SKILLS
- **6. Applying Ideas** What can individuals do to decrease ocean pollution? Write and illustrate a guide that gives at least three examples. WRITING SKILLS

#### CHAPTER

# **Highlights**

#### 1 Water Resources

#### **Key Terms**

surface water, 270 river system, 271 watershed, 271 groundwater, 272 aguifer, 272 porosity, 273 permeability, 273 recharge zone, 274

#### Main Ideas

- ▶ Only a small fraction of Earth's water supply is fresh water. The two main sources of fresh water are surface water and groundwater.
- ▶ River systems drain the land that makes up a watershed. The amount of water in a river system can vary in different seasons and from year to year.
- ▶ Groundwater accumulates in underground formations called aquifers. Surface water enters an aguifer through the aguifer's recharge zone.
- ▶ If the water in an aquifer is pumped out faster than it is replenished, the water table drops, which can affect humans and animals that depend on the groundwater.

#### 2 Water Use and Management

potable, 277 pathogen, 277 irrigation, 278 dam, 280 reservoir, 280 desalination, 283

- ▶ There are three main types of water use: residential, industrial, and agricultural. Worldwide, most water use is agricultural.
- ▶ Dams and water diversion projects are built to manage surface-water resources. Damming and diverting rivers can have environmental and social consequences.
- ▶ Water conservation is necessary to maintain an adequate supply of fresh water. Desalination and transporting water are options to supplement local water supplies.

#### **3** Water Pollution

water pollution, 284 point-source pollution, 285 nonpoint-source pollution, 285 wastewater, 286 artificial eutrophication, 288 thermal pollution, biomagnification, 292

- ▶ Water can become polluted by chemical, physical, or biological agents. Most water pollution in the United States is caused by nonpoint-source pollutants.
- ▶ Groundwater pollution is difficult to clean up because aquifers recharge slowly and because pollutants cling to the materials that make up an aquifer.
- ▶ Ocean pollution is mainly caused by coastal, nonpoint-source pollutants.
- ▶ Government legislation, such as the Clean Water Act of 1972, has succeeded in reducing surface-water pollution. Future challenges include reducing nonpoint-source pollution and groundwater pollution.

# Review **CHAPTER 11**

### **Using Key Terms**

Use each of the following terms in a separate sentence.

- **1.** *aquifer*
- **2.** *recharge zone*
- **3.** *irrigation*
- **4.** *wastewater*
- **5.** *biomagnification*

For each pair of terms, explain how the meanings of the terms differ.

- **6.** *surface water* and *groundwater*
- **7.** *porosity* and *permeability*
- **8.** *watershed* and *river system*
- **9.** *point-source pollution* and *nonpoint-source pollution*

# STUDY TIP

**Root Words** To practice vocabulary, write the key terms and definitions on a piece of paper and fold the paper lengthwise so that the definitions are covered. First, see how many definitions you already know. Then, write the definitions you do not know on another piece of paper, and practice until you know all of the terms.

#### **Understanding Key Ideas**

- **10.** Which of the following processes is *not* a part of the water cycle?
  - **a.** evaporation
  - **b.** condensation
  - **c.** biomagnification
  - **d.** precipitation
- **11.** Most of the fresh water on Earth is
  - **a.** located underground in aquifers.
  - **b.** frozen in the polar icecaps.
  - **c.** located in rivers, lakes, streams, and wetlands.
  - **d.** found in Earth's atmosphere.

- **12.** Which of the following processes is *not* used in a conventional method of water treatment?
  - **a.** filtration
  - **b.** coagulation
  - **c.** aeration
  - **d.** percolation
- **13.** Which of the following is *not* an example of point-source pollution?
  - **a.** oil that is escaping from a damaged tanker
  - **b.** heavy metals that are leaching out of an underground mine
  - **c.** water runoff from residential lawns
  - **d.** untreated sewage that is accidentally released from a wastewater treatment plant
- **14.** Which of the following pollutants causes artificial eutrophication?
  - **a.** heavy metals from unlined landfills
  - **b.** inorganic plant nutrients from wastewater and fertilizer runoff
  - **c.** toxic chemicals from factories
  - **d.** radioactive waste from nuclear power plants
- **15.** Pumping large amounts of water from an aquifer may cause the
  - **a.** water table to rise.
  - **b.** recharge zone to shrink.
  - **c.** wells in an area to run dry.
  - **d.** percolation of groundwater to stop.
- **16.** Oil pollution in the ocean is mostly caused by
  - **a.** major oil spills, such as the 1989 *Exxon Valdez* oil spill.
  - **b.** the cumulative effect of small oil spills and leaks on land.
  - **c.** decomposed plastic materials.
  - **d.** intentional dumping of excess oil.
- **17.** Thermal pollution has a harmful effect on aquatic environments because
  - **a.** water has been circulated around powerplant generators.
  - **b.** it increases the number of disease-causing organisms in aquatic environments.
  - **c.** it reduces the amount of dissolved oxygen in aquatic environments.
  - **d.** it decreases the nutrient levels in aquatic environments.

CHAPTER

# Review

| THE THREE GORGES DAM                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    |
|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| China's Yangtze River is the third<br>longest river in the world after the<br>Nile and the Amazon. The Yangtze<br>River flows through the Three<br>Gorges region of central China,<br>which is famous for its natural<br>beauty and historical sites. For<br>thousands of years, the area's sheer<br>cliffs have inspired paintings and<br>poems. This idyllic region seems like<br>the sort of place that would be pro<br>tected as a park or reserve. But in<br>fact, it is the construction site for<br>the Three Gorges Dam—the largest | About 1 million people died in the<br>last century from flooding along<br>the river. The damage caused by a<br>severe flood in 1998 is estimated to<br>cost as much as the entire dam<br>project. The dam will also provide<br>millions of people with hydroelec<br>tric power. China now burns air<br>polluting coal to meet 75 percent<br>of the country's energy needs.<br>Engineers project that when the<br>dam is completed, its turbines will<br>provide enough electrical energy to<br>power a city that is 10 times the |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    |
| hydroelectric dam project in the<br>world. When the Yangtze River is<br>dammed, it will rise to form a reser                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                | size of Los Angeles, California.<br>When the Yangtze's flow is con<br>trolled, the river will be deep                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    |
| voir that is 595 km (370 mi) long—<br>as long as Lake Superior. In other<br>words, the reservoir will be about<br>as long as the distance between Los<br>Angeles and San Francisco!                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         | enough for large ships to navigate<br>on it, so the dam will also increase<br>trade in a relatively poor region of<br>China.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     | The Three Gorges Dam is named<br>for the beautiful canyons it will flood.<br>When completed, the dam may meet<br>20 percent of China's energy needs                                                                                                                                                                                |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             | Some Disadvantages                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | with hydroelectric power.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
| Benefits of the Dam<br>The dam has several purposes. It<br>will control the water level of the<br>Yangtze River to prevent flooding.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        | The project has many drawbacks,<br>however. The reservoir behind the<br>dam will flood an enormous area.<br>Almost 2 million people living in                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    | the affected areas must be relo<br>cated—there are 13 cities and hun<br>dreds of villages in the area of the<br>proposed reservoir. As the reser<br>voir's waters rise, they will also                                                                                                                                             |
| The reservoir that will form behind the Three Gorges Dam is shown<br>in yellow.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  | destroy fragile ecosystems and<br>valuable archeological sites.<br>Opponents of the project claim                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  | that the dam will increase pollution<br>levels in the Yangtze River. Most of<br>the cities and factories along the<br>river dump untreated wastes<br>directly into the water. Some peo<br>ple think the reservoir will become<br>the world's largest sewer when<br>1 billion tons of sewage flow into<br>the reservoir every year. |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             | Long-Term Concerns<br>People have also raised long-term<br>concerns about the project. The dam<br>is being built over a fault line.<br>Scientists question whether the dam                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  | would be able to withstand earth                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |