---
chapter: 14
chapter_title: Land
section: 1
section_title: How We Use Land
---
# How We Use Land

Some years ago, officials in California decided to find out how land was being used in the state. Measurements were made using maps, aerial photographs, field surveys, and a computerized mapping system. The results were startling—in just eight years (between 1984 and 1992) nearly 84,000 hectares (about 210,000 acres) of farmland, rangeland, and woodland had been converted into suburbs and cities. This change is happening in many communities all over the world.

### Land Use and Land Cover

We use land for many purposes, including farming, mining, building cities and highways, and recreation. Land cover is what you find on a patch of land, and it often depends on how the land is used. For example, land cover might be a forest, a field of grain, or a parking lot. There are different types of land cover and different human uses for each cover type, as shown in Table 1.

Land that is covered mainly with buildings and roads is called urban land. For the purposes of determining land use and residence trends, the U.S. Census Bureau defines an urban area as an area that contains 2,500 or more people and usually has a governing body, such as a city council. Any population not classified as urban is considered rural. Land that contains relatively few people and large areas of open space are rural areas. Figure 1 shows the relative proportion of each of the types of land cover defined in Table 1. As the table shows, most land provides one or more resources that humans consume. These resources include wood in forests, crops in farmland, and mineral resources.

Table 1 ▼

| Primary Land-Use Categories             |                                                                                                                     |
|-----------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Land cover type                         | Human use of land                                                                                                   |
| Rangeland                               | land used to graze livestock and wildlife                                                                           |
| Forest land                             | land used for harvesting wood, wildlife, fish, nuts, and other resources                                            |
| Cropland                                | land used to grow plants for food and fiber                                                                         |
| Parks and preserves                     | land used for recreation and scenic enjoyment and for preserving native animal and plant communities and ecosystems |
| Wetlands, mountains, deserts, and other | land that is difficult to use for human purposes                                                                    |
| Urban land                              | land used for houses, businesses, industry, and roads                                                               |

## **Objectives**

- ▶ Distinguish between urban and rural land.
- ▶ Describe three major ways in which humans use land.
- Explain the concept of ecosystem services.

## **Key Terms**

urban rural ecosystem services

#### Land Use in the United States

Source: Natural Resources Conservation Service.

Figure 1 ▶ The graph above shows the percentage of each land cover type in the United States.

**Figure 2** The photo on the left, of New York City, shows a typical urban scene, whereas the photo on the right, of the Connecticut River Valley, shows a typical rural scene.

# **Where We Live**

Until about 1850, most people lived in rural areas. Many of them were farmers, who grew crops and raised livestock for food, clothing, and manufacturing. Other people managed the forests, worked in local mines or mills, or manufactured the necessities of life for a town.

The Industrial Revolution changed this pattern. Machinery was built that made it possible for fewer people to operate a farm or a grain mill. In addition, better transportation allowed manufacturers to be located far from their customers. So thousands of jobs in rural areas were eliminated. Many people had to move to cities to find jobs. As a result, urban areas grew rapidly during the 20th century and spread over more land. **Figure 3** shows that today, most people throughout the world live in urban areas. The movement of people from rural areas to urban areas happened rapidly in developed countries between about 1880 and 1950. Now, this movement is occurring rapidly in developing countries.

Source: Population Reference Bureau.

**Figure 3** This graph shows the proportion of people living in urban areas and rural areas in different parts of the world.

# **The Urban-Rural Connection**

Whether people live in cities or in the countryside, people are dependent on resources produced in rural areas. These resources include clean drinking water, fertile soil and land for crops, trees for wood and paper, and much of the oxygen we breathe, which is produced by plants. The resources that are produced by natural and artificial ecosystems are called Some examples of ecosystem services are shown in **Table 2. ecosystem services.**

**Supporting Urban Areas** The area of rural land needed to support one person depends on many factors, such as the climate, the standard of living, and how efficiently resources are used. In a wet climate, for example, most agriculture depends on rain and does not depend on areas of lakes and rivers for irrigation. Each person in a developed country uses the ecosystem services provided by about 8 hectares of land and water. In the United States each person uses the ecosystem services from more than 12 hectares, whereas each person in Germany uses about 6 hectares' worth. Many people in developing nations do not have access to all the resources for a healthy life. They may use ecosystem services from less than a hectare of land per person.

#### **Table 2** -

| Examples of Ecosystem Services                     |  |
|----------------------------------------------------|--|
| purification of air and water                      |  |
| preservation of soil and renewal of soil fertility |  |
| prevention of flood and drought                    |  |
| regulation of climate                              |  |
| maintenance of biodiversity                        |  |
| movement and cycling of nutrients                  |  |
| detoxification and decomposition of wastes         |  |
| aesthetic beauty                                   |  |

# MATHPRACTICE

#### **Ecosystem Services**

Earth contains about 12.4 billion hectares of productive land—cropland, grazing land, forest, fresh water, and fisheries. In 1996, the world population was about 5.7 billion people, for a mean of 2.18 hectares of productive land per person. The world population in 2010 is projected to be 6.8 billion. On average, how much productive land per person will there be in 2010?

# **SECTION 1 Review**

- **1. Explain** how ecosystem services link rural lands with urban lands.
- **2. Describe** three main ways in which humans use land. Write a paragraph to explain your answer. WRITING SKILLS
- **3. Distinguish** between rural lands and urban lands, and provide an example of each.

#### **CRITICAL THINKING**

- **4. Making Decisions** What could individuals do to reduce the loss of ecosystem services per person as the human population grows?
- **5. Making Inferences** How does the movement of people from rural lands to urban lands affect people's relationship with natural resources?