---
chapter: 14
chapter_title: Land
section: 3
section_title: Land Management and Conservation
---
## **Land Management and Conservation**

As the human population grows, the resources of more rural land are needed to support the population. The main categories of rural land are farmland, rangeland, forest land, national and state parks, and wilderness. Throughout our history, we have sometimes managed these lands sustainably so that they will provide resources indefinitely. We have also sometimes reduced their productivity by overusing or polluting them. The condition of rural land is important because of the ecological services that it provides. These services are especially important for the urban areas that rely on the productivity of rural land.

#### **Farmlands**

Farmland, such as that shown in **Figure 12,** is land that is used to grow crops and fruit. The United States contains more than 100 million hectares of prime farmland. However, in some places, urban development threatens some of the most productive farmland. Examples of places where farmland is threatened are parts of North Carolina's Piedmont region and the Twin Cities area of Minnesota. In 1996, the U.S. government established a national Farmland Protection Program to help state, county, and local governments protect farmland in danger of being paved over or otherwise developed.

#### **Objectives**

- Explain the benefits of preserving farmland.
- Describe two ways that rangeland can be managed sustainably.
- Describe the environmental effects of deforestation.
- Explain the function of parks and of wilderness areas.

#### **Key Terms**

**overgrazing deforestation reforestation wilderness**

**Hedgerows** Farmland forms an important habitat for wildlife in Great Britain, which has relatively few remaining natural areas. Fields are separated by rows of bushes called hedgerows, which provide shelter for a variety of birds, mammals, reptiles, and insects.

**Figure 12** This farmland next to the suburbs of Mililani, Hawaii, is used to grow a variety of crops.

#### **Rangelands**

Land that supports different vegetation types like grasslands, shrublands, and deserts and that is not used for farming or timber production is called *rangeland.* Rangelands can be arid, like rangelands in the desert Southwest, or relatively wet, like the rangelands of Florida. The most common human use of rangeland is for the grazing of livestock, as shown in **Figure 13.** The most common livestock are cattle, sheep, and goats, which are valued for their meat, milk, wool, and hides. Native wildlife species also graze these lands. Like farmland, rangeland is essential for maintaining the world's food supply. World population growth may require a 40 percent increase in the food production of rangeland from 1977 to 2030.

**Problems on the Range** Some rangelands in the United States have become degraded by poor land management strategies. Most damage to rangeland comes from or allowing more animals to graze in an area than the range can support. When animals overgraze, too many of the plants are eaten, and the land can become degraded. Overgrazing often results in changes in the plant community. Less desirable plant species may invade the area and replace more-desirable plant species. In cases of severe overgrazing, all the vegetation that covers the land is eaten. Once the plants are gone, there is nothing to keep the soil from eroding. **overgrazing,**

**Maintaining the Range** Much of the rangeland in the United States is public land managed by the federal government, which leases the rangeland to ranchers. Much of the rangeland in the United States is degraded. The Public Rangelands Improvement Act of 1978 was enacted to reverse this trend and improve land management practices.

Sustaining the productivity of rangeland generally means reducing overgrazing by limiting herds to sizes that do not

> degrade the land. Rangeland is also left unused for periods of time so that the vegetation can recover. Improving rangeland that has been degraded by overgrazing often includes methods such as killing invasive plants, planting native vegetation, and fencing areas to let them recover to the state they were in before they were overgrazed. Ranchers also control grazing by digging enough small water holes that livestock do not overgraze the vegetation around a single water hole.

**Figure 13**  The photo below shows productive rangeland in the western United States.

**Copyright© by Holt, Rinehart and Winston. All rights reserved.**

**Figure 14**  Methods for harvesting trees include clear-cutting (top) and selective cutting (bottom).

#### **Forest Lands**

Trees are harvested to provide products we use everyday, such as paper, furniture, and lumber and plywood for our homes. In addition to wood and paper, we also value forest products such as maple syrup and turpentine. There are many ecosystem services provided by forests; however, one of the most important is the removal of CO2 from the air.

**Harvesting Trees** People use enormous amounts of wood. The worldwide average is 1,800 cm3 of wood used per person each day. However, on average, each person in the United States uses about 3.5 times this amount. This is the equivalent of each person in the United States cutting down a tree that is 30 m tall every year. About 1.5 billion people in developing countries depend on firewood as their main source of fuel.

The timber industry classifies forest lands into three categories—virgin forest, which is forest that has never been cut; native forest, which is forest that is planted and managed; and tree farms, which are areas where trees are planted in rows and harvested like other crops. The two most widely used methods of harvesting trees are clear-cutting and selective cutting. These methods are shown in **Figure 14.** *Clear-cutting* is the process of removing all of the trees from an area of land. Clear-cutting large areas destroys wildlife habitat and causes soil erosion. The main alternative is selective cutting, which is usually practiced on smaller areas owned by individuals. *Selective cutting* is the process of cutting and removing only middle-aged or mature trees. Selective cutting is more expensive than clear-cutting, but selective cutting is usually much less destructive.

## **QuickLAB**

#### **Measuring Soil Depth and Compaction**

#### **Procedure**

- 1. Find a plot of **undisturbed soil** in a forest, meadow, park, or other undisturbed area near your school.
- 2. Press a **meterstick** down into the undisturbed soil as far as it will go. Record how deep the meterstick went into the soil. Record how soft the soil was and how easy it was to press the meterstick into the soil. Repeat this five times in the same plot of undisturbed soil.
- 3. Pour 1 L of **water** onto the undisturbed soil. Use a **stopwatch** to record how long it takes for the soil to fully absorb the water.
- 4. Repeat this procedure at a plot of **disturbed soil** in a bike path, dirt road, or other area where the soil is bare and vegetation has been cleared or trampled.

#### **Analysis**

- 1. How did the soil depth and hardness in the plot of undisturbed soil differ from that in the plot of disturbed soil?
- 2. Which plot absorbed water faster?
- 3. How might grazing cattle affect the depth and compaction of an undisturbed plot of land?
- 4. How might clear-cutting affect an undisturbed plot of land?

**Burning Trees and CO2** When trees are cut and burned, they release carbon dioxide. From 1850 to 1990, deforestation released more than 100 billion metric tons of carbon dioxide into the atmosphere worldwide. Some scientists think this additional CO2 is contributing to an increase in global temperatures.

**Deforestation** The clearing of trees from an area without replacing them is called Most countries become severely deforested as populations expand and the demand for forest products increases. Forests are cleared to convert the land into farmland. People also clear forests to make space for roads, homes, factories, and office buildings. **deforestation.**

Deforestation reduces wildlife habitat, but it has other impacts, too. For example, when forests are cleared from hillsides, soil erosion usually results if the area is not quickly planted with a cover crop. Without tree roots to hold the soil in place, soil is easily washed or blown into the valley below. In New York, forests on hillsides were cleared for farmland during the 19th century. Plowing also increased the rate of erosion, and as much as 90 percent of the soil eroded. Then, during the Great Depression, which was in the 1930s, hundreds of farmers in this area went bankrupt. The state bought many of these abandoned farms, and let the forests regenerate. Today, many of these hilltops are covered with state forest, which is used for recreation.

The rate of deforestation is especially high in tropical rain forests, where the soil is relatively thin. Farmers who clear forests in these areas must always move from one plot of land to another and clear more forest each time they move. Whether forests are cleared for farming or wood, if trees are not replanted, natural resources are steadily depleted.

## **California's Wilderness Corridors**

California has an extraordinary range of habitats, from coastal islands, where elephant seals breed, to mountains where salmon, cougars, bobcats, and badgers are found. Many of these animals live on wildlife preserves and other public lands or on private land.

Animals do not know that they are safest if they stay on preserves. Many animals naturally migrate at different times of the year. Young animals are often evicted from their territories by their parents and must search for territories of their own to survive. Many animals also leave their territories in search of mates from other populations. This process is

important because if animals reproduce only with members of the species that live nearby, the population becomes inbred and genetic defects become more common.

As California becomes more urbanized, however, migration routes between one population of animals and another population are increasingly blocked by highways and housing developments.

A possible solution is the acquisition of conservation corridors—thin strips of protected land that connect one preserve with another preserve. Conservation biologists have argued for years over whether such corridors are

 This diagram shows suspected wildlife corridors around Los Angeles, California.

**Reforestation** Clear-cut forest can be replanted or allowed to regrow naturally, without human intervention. is the process by which trees are planted to re-establish trees that have been cut down in a forest land. In some places, reforestation is happening faster than trees are being cut down. New England, for example, now contains more forest than it did a century ago. Much of the original forest had been cleared for farming, but the land was unable to sustain productive crops over a long period. As farming in this area became less economical, farms were abandoned and the forest regenerated. The same process has happened in places where steep hillsides were deforested for farming or development. The cost of deforestation, which caused soil erosion, landslides, and flooding, was too high. So forest has now been allowed to regenerate or has been replanted. **Reforestation**

Some governments require reforestation after timber has been harvested from public land. A reforestation project is shown in **Figure 15.** Worldwide, more than 90 percent of all timber comes from forests that are not managed by an agency that monitors the health of forest ecosystems. Many governments are currently working to improve reforestation efforts and to promote less destructive logging methods. Private organizations have also established tree-planting programs on roadsides and in cities.

**Figure 15**  Tree seedlings have been planted to reforest this hillside as part of a reforestation project in the Fiji Islands.

Cougars may need wildlife corridors in order to survive in parts of California.

effective in linking habitats and protecting animals.

One such corridor in California is the Tenaja corridor, which connects the Santa Rosa Plateau Ecological Preserve and the larger Cleveland National Forest in the Santa Ana Mountains southeast of

Los Angeles. Biologist Paul Beir studied the movements of a population of cougars in the Santa Ana Mountains by putting radio collars on more than 30 animals to track their movements. He found that the animals used the Tenaja corridor and avoided urban areas.

Now there is public pressure to preserve 232 of the corridors that link critical habitats. Voters have approved bond measures that will supply the money to buy some of the land, and the Nature Conservancy is also contributing land. The question of whether wildlife corridors preserve species may finally be answered by California's initiative.

#### CRITICAL THINKING

**1. Applying Ideas** California's state emblem is a grizzly bear, which is a species no longer found in the state. Why do you think the bears disappeared?

**2. Expressing Viewpoints** Should California spend state money to preserve habitats? Explain your answer.

**Figure 16**  National parks in the United States are concentrated in the West.

**Figure 17**  Biosphere reserves are places where human populations and wildlife live side by side.

### **Parks and Preserves**

In the 1870s, a group of explorers approached Congress with news of a magnificent expanse of land in Wyoming and Montana. These explorers expressed their concern that this land would be damaged by the development that had changed the northeastern United States. Congress agreed to protect this land by setting it aside for the public to use and enjoy, and the first national park—Yellowstone—was created. Today, the United States has about 50 national parks, as shown in **Figure 16.** If you are a U.S. citizen, you share ownership of these lands.

Public lands in the United States have many purposes. Most public lands are not as protected as the national parks are. Some public lands are leased to private companies for logging, mining, and ranching. Other public lands are maintained for hunting and fishing, as wildlife refuges, or to protect endangered species.

International efforts include the United Nations's Man and the Biosphere Program. This program has set up several hundred preserves throughout the world since 1976. These preserves are called *biosphere reserves* and are unusual in that they include people in the management plan of the reserves, as shown in **Figure 17.**

**Wilderness** The U.S. Wilderness Act, which was passed in 1964, designated certain lands as wilderness areas. is an area in which the land and the ecosystems it supports are protected from all exploitation. Wilderness areas are found within several of the nation's public land systems. So far, 474 regions covering almost 13 million hectares (32 million acres) have been designated as wilderness in the United States. **Figure 18** shows an example of a wilderness area. These areas are open to hiking, fishing, boating (without motors), and camping. Building roads or structures and using motorized equipment is not allowed in wilderness areas. **Wilderness**

**Benefits of Protected Areas** Without national and private parks and preserves around the world, many more species would now be extinct. In a crowded world, these protected areas often provide the only place where unspoiled forests, deserts, or prairies remain. Without these areas, the plants and animals that can survive only in these ecosystems would disappear. These protected areas also provide recreation for people. People can camp, hike, fish, and watch birds and other wildlife in these areas. Wilderness areas also serve as outdoor classrooms and research laboratories where people can learn more about the natural world.

**Threats to Protected Areas** There is a constant battle in our world between our conservation efforts and the growing and increasingly mobile population. Around the world, more people visit national parks and wilderness areas each year and leave their mark on the land. Litter and traffic jams that have plagued our cities now plague many of our national parks. Rangelands, mining and logging sites, oil and gas drilling operations, factories, power plants, and urban areas are often close enough to the parks to affect the parks. In addition, preserved areas are affected by climate change and by air and water pollution, as are most other parts of the world.

In attempts to protect wilderness from damage, limits have been set in some areas on the number of people permitted in the area at any given time. Some areas are completely closed to visitors to allow wild animals to breed. In addition, volunteer programs are now active in many wilderness areas. Volunteers help pick up trash, build trails, control invading or exotic species, and help educate the visiting public.

**Figure 18**  In the United States, wilderness areas, such as the High Uintas Wilderness area shown here, are supposed to be preserved untouched for our own and future generations.

### **SECTION 3 Review**

- **1. Explain** what reforestation is and why it is important.
- **2. List** and explain two methods of managing rangelands sustainably.
- **3. Describe** the function of parks and of wilderness.
- **4. Describe** the environmental effects of deforestation.

#### **CRITICAL THINKING**

- **5. Recognizing Relationships** Read the first paragraph under the head "Threats to Protected Areas." Why do you suppose that some of our nation's national parks and wilderness areas are degraded? READING SKILLS
- **6. Recognizing Relationships** What are the benefits of preserving farmland?

## **Highlights**

#### 1 How We Use Land

#### **Key Terms**

urban, 355 rural, 355 ecosystem services, 357

#### Main Ideas

- ▶ Land is covered with forest, farm fields and pastures, roads, and towns.
- ▶ Urban areas are mostly covered with houses, roads, businesses, and industrial and municipal structures. Rural areas have less dense human populations and include forest land, cropland, rangeland, and other land cover types.
- ▶ Urban areas need very large areas of rural ecosystems to supply them with water, food, wood, and other ecosystem services.

#### 2 Urban Land Use

urbanization, 358 infrastructure, 359 urban sprawl, 359 heat island, 360 land-use planning, 361 geographic information system (GIS),

- ▶ Urbanization is the migration of people from rural to urban areas.
- ▶ When cities grow more rapidly than infrastructure can be built, they tend to suffer from substandard housing and traffic problems.
- ▶ Unplanned growth of a city results in urban sprawl, as low-density development spreads into the surrounding countryside.
- ▶ Land-use planning is essential if urban areas are to be pleasant places to live.

#### 3 Land Management and Conservation

overgrazing, 364 deforestation, 366 reforestation, 367 wilderness, 368

- ▶ Farmland is used to raise crops and livestock.
- ▶ Rangeland is land used primarily for grazing livestock. Rangeland is easily degraded by overgrazing.
- ▶ Trees are harvested for many purposes. Deforestation can cause soil erosion and may threaten forest plants and animals with extinction.
- National lands are used for many purposes, including lumber, mining, and recreation. Wilderness is national land that is protected from all exploitation for the benefit of future generations.

# **CHAPTER 14**

## Review

#### **Using Key Terms**

Use each of the following terms in a separate sentence.

- **1.** *rangeland*
- **2.** *infrastructure*
- **3.** *urbanization*
- **4.** *ecosystem services*
- **5.** *geographic information system*

For each pair of terms, explain how the meanings of the terms differ.

- **6.** *heat island* and *urban sprawl*
- **7.** *overgrazing* and *deforestation*
- **8.** *urban* and *rural*
- **9.** *selective cutting* and *clear-cutting*

#### STUDY TIP

**Flash Cards** With a partner, make flash cards for the key words and most important ideas in the chapter. Take turns quizzing each other about the content of the course. Do another round, and this time the person being asked questions should try to use each key word and idea in a complete sentence.

#### **Understanding Key Ideas**

- **10.** Building a mass transit system is likely to have which of the following effects?
  - **a.** increasing air pollution
  - **b.** traffic congestion
  - **c.** increasing the temperature of the urban heat island
  - **d.** none of the above
- **11.** National parks and wilderness areas are designed to do which of the following?
  - **a.** provide recreation
  - **b.** protect wildlife
  - **c.** preserve natural areas
  - **d.** all of the above

- **12.** Which of the following is *not* an example of urbanization?
  - **a.** Immigrants settle in New York City.
  - **b.** A farmer who can no longer afford to lease farmland moves to a city.
  - **c.** A drop in timber prices in Oregon causes a lumberjack to lose his job and he moves to Portland.
  - **d.** An Indian family moves to the city of Calcutta after a landslide destroys their village.
- **13.** Which of the following is *not* an example of infrastructure?
  - **a.** a railroad
  - **b.** a school
  - **c.** a telephone line
  - **d.** a dairy farm
- **14.** Which of the following is a likely result of deforestation?
  - **a.** The amount of carbon dioxide removed from the atmosphere is reduced.
  - **b.** Wind blows soil away because its plant cover has been removed.
  - **c.** Water runs off the land more rapidly and causes floods.
  - **d.** all of the above
- **15.** Which of the following is *not* likely to cause the degradation of rangeland?
  - **a.** adding more animals to a herd grazing on rangeland
  - **b.** a drought in which rainfall is lower than usual for three years
  - **c.** planting grass seed on the land
  - **d.** driving a vehicle off-road
- **16.** Which of the following is an example of reforestation?
  - **a.** replanting forest land that has been clear-cut
  - **b.** planting a cherry tree in your backyard
  - **c.** planting oak trees in a city
  - **d.** all of the above
- **17.** Which of the following is *not* an ecosystem service provided by rural lands?
  - **a.** oxygen in the air
  - **b.** food
  - **c.** aesthetic beauty
  - **d.** wood for making paper

#### **Short Answer**

- **18.** Explain one way rangeland can be degraded.
- **19.** Do national parks and forests in the United States protect ecosystems from human activities? Explain your answer.
- **20.** What is the difference between a U.S. wilderness area and a national park?
- **21.** Are national parks located only in the United States?
- **22.** How can building a mass transit system improve living standards in an urban area?

#### **Interpreting Graphics**

The map below shows a typical UN Biosphere Reserve. Use the map to answer questions 23–25.

- **23.** Where is the reserve's research station located, and why has it been placed there rather than anywhere else in the reserve?
- **24.** What indicators can you see that this reserve might be an ecotourism destination?
- **25.** What does the map tell you about the function of buffer zone 2?

- Human settlement
- Tourism and education center
- Research station

#### **Concept Mapping**

**26.** Use the following terms to create a concept map: *geographic information system, landuse planning, infrastructure, population,* and *urban area.*

#### **Critical Thinking**

- **27. Recognizing Relationships** Read about clear-cutting under the head "Harvesting Trees." What effects does clear-cutting a hillside have on the environment? READING SKILLS
- **28. Drawing Inferences** If we see many invasive plant species and large areas of bare soil on rangeland, what conclusions can we draw about the land management practices on this rangeland? Explain your answer.
- **29. Evaluating Assumptions** We tend to think that the main use of livestock is for meat. However, the Masai herders of Africa do not slaughter their cattle. They use the milk. They also bleed the cattle and use to the blood to make a protein-rich sausage. What other uses for livestock can you think of that do not involve killing the animals?

#### **Cross-Disciplinary Connection**

**30. History** Find out how deforestation has affected a community. If you live in a forest biome, you can document the effects of deforestation on local rivers and farmland. If not, you will probably have to find an example on the Internet or in a magazine. Write a paragraph for your answer, using at least three key terms from this chapter. WRITING SKILLS

#### **Portfolio Project**

**31. Research** Diagram the growth of your community over the last 100 years. Express this as a graph that shows the growth of the population and a map that shows the area of ground the community covers. There are various possible sources for the data you will need. If there is a local historical society, this is probably the best source. Otherwise, city hall or the local newspaper will probably have the information.

#### **MATH SKILLS**

The graph below shows land cover in the United States in 1997. Use the graph below to answer questions 32–33.

- **32. Analyzing Data** If the percentage of cropland increased to 25 percent, and all other land cover categories except for rangeland and pasture remained the same, what percentage would rangeland and pasture be?
- **33. Making Calculations** What percentage of the United States is planted in crops if 11 percent of cropland is idle (unplanted) at any one time?

#### **WRITING SKILLS**

**34. Communicating Main Ideas** In what ways does urban sprawl reduce the quality of life for people in the suburbs as well as in the town or city?

#### **READING FOLLOW-UP**

Now that you have read the chapter, take a moment to review your answers to the **Reading Warm-Up** questions in your **EcoLog.** If necessary, revise your answers.

#### STANDARDIZED TEST PREP

## Read the passage below, and then answer the questions that follow.

When more people live in a city than its infrastructure can support, living conditions deteriorate. For example, many people do not have access to clean water for drinking and washing. In addition, overcrowding causes the prices of existing houses and apartments to rise above the reach of many workers. Increasing numbers of people become homeless. These problems have become so widespread throughout the developed and developing world, that the term *urban crisis* was coined to describe the problem. According to the United Nations, the crisis is so bad that almost one-fourth of the world's city dwellers could be homeless by the year 2020.

- **1.** According to the passage, which of the following statements is true?
  - **a.** Cities have grown so rapidly that the rural areas that supply the cities with food and fuel cannot do so fast enough.
  - **b.** Overcrowded cities lead to unaffordable housing and homelessness.
  - **c.** The urban crisis does not usually involve water pollution.
  - **d.** Living conditions usually improve when the population of a city increases.
- **2.** Which of the following is an example of the urban crisis, according to the passage?
  - **a.** To make space for more cars, roads into and through a city are widened.
  - **b.** Deforestation in the countryside surrounding a city causes the water level in a river that flows through the city to increase when it rains.
  - **c.** Homelessness is increasing rapidly in cities in both developed and developing countries.
  - **d.** Inadequate planning for a growing number of commuters results in traffic jams on roads leading into the city in rush hour.

# **CHAPTER 14**

## Inquiry Lab: DESIGN YOUR OWN

#### **Objectives**

- **Create** a simulated land-use model.
- **Recognize** conflicts of interest that arise during a negotiation.
- **Analyze** and draw conclusions about the effect of compromise on the desired outcome for each interested party in a land-use plan. USING SCIENTIFIC METHODS

#### **Materials**

**colored pencils graph paper pens**

#### **Laws**

- At least 10 percent of each type of habitat must be preserved.
- Landfills must be at least two acres away from all housing, wetlands and fresh water sites.
- Roads and bridges may cross rivers and wetlands but they must go around large natural areas.
- Roads must be connected to all developed areas of the city.
- There must be no building over wetlands, slopes and fresh water. Only parks may partially cover these habitats and roads/bridges may cross them.

#### **Creating a Land-Use Model**

Land-use plans are drawn up by planners, but they are created with the combined input of various members of a community. Along with three other people, you are meeting to plan the development of 400 acres of land for your growing city. Your team is composed of the following four members:

#### **Team Members**

- The **Planner** is concerned with creating a plan that encourages the sort of growth that will attract businesses and new citizens to the area.
- The **Developer** bought the land from the city and is interested in the right to build housing and a shopping center.
- The **Conservationist** is interested in preserving open space and natural areas from further development.
- The **Law Enforcer** ensures that all of the laws and regulations are met for any new development project.

#### **Procedure**

- **1.** Have each team member select one of the four jobs above.
- **2.** Use all or part of a large piece of graph paper as your map. Mark off an area that will represent 400 square acres. Determine the approximate scale, and label the sides of your area accordingly.
- **3.** The planner will color in the map as follows:
  - **a.** 40 acres will be fresh water (rivers and/or lakes) and is colored light blue.
  - **b.** 80 acres will be wetlands that are right next to some of the fresh water and are colored light purple or lavender.
  - **c.** 40 acres will be land that is too sloped for building and will be colored tan.
  - **d.** 240 acres is land that is good for development and will be colored light green.
- **4.** Once the land is colored in, it cannot be altered. That will be the land you work with.
- **5.** After the area is colored in, the group must discuss how and where to put the following items:
  - **a.** 40 acres for a landfill
  - **b.** 20 acres for utilities such as power plants, water treatment facilities, etc.
  - **c.** 40 acres for parks and wildlife
  - **d.** 20 acres for housing. Try to put the houses near a beautiful area.